# Emergency Severity Index, Version 4: Implementation Handbook

### Note from the Director

The Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality is pleased to bring you the Emergency Severity
_Index, Version 4: Implementation Handbook. This manual covers all details of the Emergency_
Severity Index (ESI)—a five-level emergency department triage algorithm that provides
clinically relevant stratification of patients into five groups from 1 (most urgent) to 5 (least
urgent) on the basis of acuity and resource needs.

After emergency physicians Richard Wuerz and David Eitel developed the ESI in 1998 and
pilot testing yielded favorable results, the ESI Triage Group was formed. Further work on the
initial development of ESI was carried out under an AHRQ grant. The ESI Triage Group, which
consisted of medical clinicians, managers, educators, and researchers, further refined the
algorithm to what it is today.

In keeping with our mission to improve the quality, safety, efficiency, and effectiveness of
health care for all Americans, one of AHRQ's areas of emphasis is training. Along with the
accompanying set of two DVDs, this handbook will provide invaluable assistance to
emergency department nurses, physicians, and administrators in the implementation of a
comprehensive ESI educational program. These materials are based on ESI Version 4, which
updates the algorithm with a particular emphasis on the expansion of ESI level 1 criteria and
refinement of the pediatric fever criteria.

A well-implemented ESI program will help hospital emergency departments rapidly identify
patients in need of immediate attention, better identify patients who could safely and more
efficiently be seen in a fast-track or urgent care center rather than the main ED, and more
accurately determine thresholds for diversion of ambulance patients from the ED.

We hope that you find this tool useful in your ongoing efforts to improve the quality of care
provided by your emergency department.

### Chapter 2.Triage Acuity Systems

##### Standardization of Triage Acuity

Although there are more than 110 million visits to
U.S. emergency departments (EDs) each year
(McCaig & Burt, 2004) there are very little aggregate
data about those visits on the local, regional or
national level. It is difficult to answer important
questions such as “Which EDs see the sickest
patients?” and “How does patient acuity affect ED
overcrowding?” There is growing interest in the
establishment of standards for ED data in the United
States to support clinical care, ED surveillance,
benchmarking, and research activities (Barthell,
Coonan, Finnell, Pollock, & Cochrane, 2004; Gilboy,
Travers & Wuerz, 1999; Handler et al., 2004;
National Center for Injury Prevention and Control

[NCIPC], 1997; Zimmermann, 2001). One important
ED data element is triage acuity, which has been
defined by the Data Elements for Emergency
Department Systems Task Force as: “Classification of
patient acuity that characterizes the degree to which
the patient's condition is life- or limb-threatening,
and whether immediate treatment is needed to
alleviate symptoms” (NCIPC, 1997, p. 94).

Unfortunately, there is great variability in ED triage
acuity systems, particularly in the United States
(Emergency Nurses Association [ENA], 1997). The
various systems describe triage categories using
different labels, and the definitions for each level are
not universally agreed upon. Examples of acuity
rating systems are listed in Table 2-1. Given the lack
of standardization of triage acuity data in the U.S., it
is not surprising that the ED has been described as a
“black box” of vital public health information that
is largely inaccessible in present forms (Martinez,
1995).

The Emergency Severity Index (ESI) is a promising
new tool for triage acuity assessment in the ED. It
has been shown to be reproducible across EDs, 
including urban and rural settings and academic and
community hospitals (Eitel, Travers, Rosenau, Gilboy
& Wuerz, 2003). If implemented widely in U.S. EDs,
the ESI has the potential to become a standard for
triage acuity assessment. In this chapter, we describe
the types of triage systems traditionally used in EDs
in the United States, and then present a review of
the research on those systems. Next, a brief
description of recent triage methods that have been
developed in Australia, Canada and the United
Kingdom is presented. The chapter concludes with a
review of the research on the new ESI triage system
and discusses the potential benefits of the ESI.

##### Triage Systems in the United States

Though many U.S. hospitals still use a three- or fourlevel triage system, the trend is toward the use of
five-level systems. The National Center for Health
Statistics plans to replace four-level triage data with
five-level triage data in future national
benchmarking surveys of U.S. EDs. This decision was
based upon the growing evidence that five-level
triage acuity data are more reliable and valid than
three-level systems (personal communication, Linda
McCaig, National Center for Health Statistics,
October 6, 2004).

Both ENA and the American College of Emergency
Physicians (ACEP) have come out in support of fivelevel triage systems for U.S. EDs. A joint ENA-ACEP
task force was convened in 2003 to study the
evidence on five-level triage systems. The task force's
work is ongoing at present. The ACEP and ENA
issued the following joint statement in 2003:

_ACEP and ENA believe that quality of patient_
_care would benefit from implementing a_
_standardized emergency department (ED) triage_
_scale and acuity categorization process. Based on_
_expert consensus of currently available evidence,_
_ACEP and ENA support the adoption of a_
_reliable, valid five-level triage scale (ACEP,_
_2003; ENA, 2003)._

In a paper published by the task force in 2005, both
the ESI and Canadian Triage and Acuity Scale (CTAS)
were recommended as valid and reliable triage
systems. (Fernandes et al., 2005) In light of the
growing evidence supporting five-level triage
systems, it is likely that more U.S. hospitals are now
using some form of five-level triage. The ENA plans
to collect data about U.S. hospitals' use of the
various triage systems in their upcoming ED survey.

##### Research on Triage Systems in the United States

There is a growing body of research on triage acuity
systems. The research has focused on two key
features of acuity ratings by triage nurses: reliability
and validity (Pedhazur & Schmelkin, 1991; Waltz,
Strickland & Lenz, 1991). Reliability is the
consistency, or agreement, among those using a
rating system. There are two types of reliability that
pertain to ED triage acuity ratings. First, interrater
reliability is a measure of reproducibility: Will two
different nurses rate the same patient with the same
triage acuity level? Intrarater reliability is an
indication of whether the same nurse, over time,
will rate the same patient with the same acuity level.
Several studies in the United States have
demonstrated poor inter- and intrarater reliability of
conventional three-level triage systems (Gill, Reese &
Diamond, 1996; Travers, Waller, Bowling, Flowers &
Tintinalli, 2002; Wuerz, Fernandes & Alarcon, 1998).
In one study, 305 triage ratings were reviewed after
all triage nurses attended a mandatory refresher
course on the hospital's three-level triage scale
(Travers et al., 2002). The original triage nurses'
ratings were compared with retrospective ratings
assigned by an expert panel of ED triage nurses, and
there was agreement in approximately half of the
cases.

Validity is the accuracy of the rating system, and
assesses how well the system measures what it is
intended to measure. The validity of acuity ratings is
an indication of whether or not the rating, for
example, of “nonurgent” is an accurate assessment
of the lack of urgency of an ED patient's problem.
Validity has proven difficult to assess for triage
acuity, and has not been reported in research studies

on conventional three-level triage in the United
States. Unlike the urine culture, which is the gold
standard for the correct clinical diagnosis of a
urinary tract infection, there is no clear gold
standard against which the validity of triage acuity
ratings can be measured. However, proxy measures
that have been used to evaluate five-level systems
include admission rates, resource utilization and 6month mortality.

##### Triage Acuity Research on Five- Level Systems Abroad

There are well-validated and reliable five-level triage
systems that have become the standard in other
countries. Three of those systems are described in
Table 2-2.

The Australasian Triage Scale (ATS), a system
developed in Australia, has been used throughout
Australia and New Zealand since the early 1990s
(Australasian College for Emergency Medicine, 1994,
2002; Cameron, Bradt & Ashby, 1996). The
Australian Council on Healthcare Standards has
adopted the ATS as a basis of ED assessment and
quality of care, and triage ratings are subject to
regular review. Australian EDs are expected to treat
patients according to standards based on the triage
category. For example, an emergency patient must
be seen within 10 minutes, whereas a nonurgent
patient must be seen within 2 hours.

Validity and reliability of the ATS have been
evaluated in several studies. In the absence of a true
gold standard for triage acuity assessment,
researchers have compared the five-level scale to
other severity of illness scales and outcomes
(Cameron et al., 1996; Cleary, Ashby, Jelinek &
Lagaida, 1994, Erwich, Bond, Phillips, & Baggoley,
1997). Triage levels correlated highly with disease
and population-specific scales including the Injury
Severity Scales, trauma score, and cardiac, asthma
and pediatric scales. The ATS has been shown to
correlate strongly with resource consumption and
outcome data, such as admission rates, ED length of
stay and mortality rates. Research has also shown
that the ATS has a fair to moderate degree of
interrater reliability in studies in which triage nurses
were asked to rate the acuity of patients described in
case study format (Dilley & Standen, 1998, Jelinek
& Little, 1996).

Five-level triage systems have also been
implemented in the United Kingdom (U.K.) and
Canada. The Manchester Triage Scale is used in the

U.K., and utilizes a presentational flow-chart based
format (Manchester Triage Group, 1997). Nurses first
identify the patient's chief complaint, and then
choose one of 52 flow charts to conduct a structured
interview and then assign a triage level from 1
(immediate care needed) to 5 (care within 4 hours).
The system has been endorsed by the Accident and
Emergency Nurses Association (Zimmermann, 2001).
There is limited research on the Manchester system.
In one study of reliability, triage nurse ratings were
compared retrospectively to senior medical staff
ratings; agreement was only fair to moderate
(Goodacre, Gillett, Harris & Houlihan, 1999).

The Canadian Triage and Acuity Scale (CTAS) was
developed by a group of Canadian emergency
physicians. (Beveridge & Ducharme, 1997; Canadian
Association for Emergency Physicians [CAEP], 2002).
The National Emergency Nurses' Affiliation, Inc.
(NENA) and the Canadian Association for
Emergency Physicians (CAEP) have endorsed the
CTAS as the national standard for ED triage.
Canadian hospitals are required to submit data to
the Canadian government, including CTAS ratings,
on all ED visits. The Canadian five-level scale has
also been shown to have good interrater reliability
in studies in which clinicians rated the acuity of
written scenarios taken from actual patient cases

##### History of the Emergency Severity Index (ESI)

The Emergency Severity Index (ESI) is a five-level
triage scale developed by ED physicians Richard
Wuerz and David Eitel in the United States (Gilboy
et al., 1999; Wuerz, Milne, Eitel, Travers & Gilboy,
2000). The two originators believed that a principal
role for an emergency department triage instrument
is to facilitate the prioritization of patients based on
the urgency of the patients' conditions. The triage
nurse determines priority by posing the question,
“Who should be seen first?” Drs. Wuerz and Eitel
realized, however, that when more than one top
priority patient is present simultaneously, the
operating question becomes, “How long can
everybody wait?” The ESI was developed around a
new conceptual model of ED triage. In addition to
asking which patient should be seen first, triage
nurses use the ESI to also consider what resources
are necessary to get the patient through to an ED
disposition. The ESI retains the traditional
foundation of patient urgency, and then seeks to
accomplish a second goal, not just patient sorting
but also patient streaming: Getting the right patient
to the right resources at the right place and at the
right time.

Version 1 (v. 1) of the ESI was originally
implemented at two university-based EDs in the
spring of 1999. By the fall of 2000, the ESI was
revised with input from ED clinicians to include
pediatric patient triage criteria, and then version 2
(v. 2) was implemented in five additional hospitals
(including non-university teaching and community
settings). Based on feedback from nurses and
physicians using the ESI at these sites, along with
the best available scientific evidence, the ESI was
further refined as version 3 (v. 3) in 2001 (Wuerz et
al., 2001). Recent work has led to additional
revisions to the tool, which is introduced in this
edition of the ESI handbook as version 4 (v. 4)
(Tanabe et al., in press).

Emergency physicians and nurses in the United
States and Canada have conducted several research
studies in which the reliability and validity of the
ESI has been assessed. The ESI has been directly
compared to conventional three-level triage and to
the five-level CTAS. These studies will be described
later in the chapter. Like the Australasian, Canadian
and U.K. scales, ESI triage has five levels. However, it
is different in both its conceptual approach and
practical application. The underlying assumption of
the triage scales from Australia, Canada and the U.K.
is that the purpose of triage is to determine how
long the patient can wait for care in the ED. Clear
definitions of time to physician evaluation are an
integral part of both algorithms. This represents a
major difference between ESI and CTAS and the ATS.
ESI does not define expected time intervals to
physician evaluation.

The ESI is unique in that it also requires the triage
nurse to anticipate expected resource needs (e.g.,
diagnostic tests and procedures), in addition to
acuity, to determine a triage category for less acute
patients. The ESI triage levels are outlined in Figure
2-1. The process of categorizing ED patients using
the ESI will be described in detail in subsequent
chapters. Briefly, acuity judgments are addressed first
based on the stability of the patient's vital functions
and the likelihood of an immediate life or organ
threat. Then expected resource needs are addressed
for stable patients based on the experienced triage
nurse's prediction of the resources needed to get the
patient to an emergency department disposition.
Resource needs can range from none to two or
more.

##### Research on the Emergency Severity Index

In a pilot study of ESI v.1 ratings for 493 triage
encounters at two Boston hospitals in 1998,
researchers found that the system was both valid
and reliable (Wuerz et al., 2000). The patients were
triaged simultaneously by the triage nurse using the
traditional three-level scale and by the research
nurse who used the initial version of the ESI. Then,
an investigator triaged the patients again using the
ESI. The investigator was blinded to the research
nurses' ESI rating, and used only the written triage
note to make the triage decision. Triage levels were
strongly associated with resources used in the ED
and with outcomes such as hospitalization. Higher
acuity patients (ESI levels 1 and 2) consumed more
resources and were more likely to be admitted to the
hospital than low resource patients (ESI levels 4 and
5). Interrater reliability between the research nurse
and the investigator was found to be good, with 77
percent exact agreements and 22 percent within one
triage level.

The reliability of the ESI has been evaluated in
several studies, using the kappa statistic to measure
inter-rater reliability. Kappas can range from 0 (no
agreement) to 1 (perfect agreement). At one of the
two original ESI sites, a time series design was used
to compare the reliability of triage ratings using a
three-level scale, then ESI v.1 was implemented and
triage ratings were re-examined (Travers et al., 2002).
Reliability improved from a weighted kappa of 0.53
for the three-level system to 0.68 for the five-level
ESI. In another study, researchers examined the
reliability and validity of ESI v.2 during and after
implementation of the system into triage practice at
seven hospitals in the northeast and southeast.
During the ESI triage education program, more than
200 triage nurses at the seven sites were asked to rate
40 case studies using the ESI (Eitel et al., 2003). The
study results indicated substantial interrater
reliability with kappas ranging from 0.70 to 0.80.
Three hundred eighty-six triage decisions on actual
patients were also evaluated and found to have high
interrater reliability, with weighted kappas ranging
from 0.69 to 0.87. In another study at a Midwestern,
urban ED, researchers evaluated the reliability of the
ESI v.3 for 403 actual patient triages and found a
kappa of 0.89 (Tanabe, Gimbel, Yarnold, Kyriacou &
Adams, 2004).

Canadian and American researchers have also
directly compared the inter-rater reliability of the ESI
and the CTAS in a randomized trial (Worster et al.,
2004). They studied the triage assignments of ten
Canadian triage nurses experienced with CTAS. The
nurses were randomly assigned to initial ESI v.3 or
CTAS refresher training, and then rated 200 case
studies with the ESI or CTAS, respectively. Both
groups had excellent inter-rater reliability, with
kappas of 0.89 (ESI) and 0.91 (CTAS).

The validity of the ESI has been evaluated by
examination of outcomes for several thousand
patients. The studies found consistent, strong
correlations of the ESI with hospitalization, ED
length of stay, and mortality (Eitel et al., 2003;
Tanabe, et al., 2004; Wuerz, 2001; Wuerz et al.,
2001). The ESI has also been found to have
moderate correlations with physician evaluation and
management codes and nursing workload measures
(Travers et al., 2002). The ESI has been shown to
facilitate meaningful comparisons of case mix
between hospitals. A stratified random sample of
200 patients was selected from each of the seven
initial ESI hospitals, and case mix was compared
(Eitel et al., 2003). As expected, there was a higher
percentage of high acuity patients at the tertiary care
centers, compared with a higher percentage of low
resource patients at the community hospitals.

In a survey of nursing staff at the two original
university teaching hospitals, responses to the
implementation of the ESI were positive (Wuerz et
al., 2001). The nurses reported that the ESI was
easier to use and more useful in prioritizing patients
for treatment than the former three-level systems in
use at the two sites.

In the most recent study of the ESI, the validity of
ESI level 2 was examined in detail (Tanabe et al., in
press). In an evaluation of outcomes for 571 ESI
level-2 patients at five hospitals, it was found that
20 percent of level-2 patients received immediate,
life-saving interventions. The authors concluded
that such patients would benefit from being
classified as ESI level 1. The updated ESI v. 4
presented in later chapters of this book reflects the
revisions made to the ESI based upon this recent
study.

##### Benefits of the Emergency Severity Index

To date, the ESI has been implemented by hospitals
in different regions of the country, by university and
community hospitals, and by teaching and nonteaching sites. The ED clinicians, managers and
researchers at those sites have identified several
benefits of ESI triage over conventional three-level
scales. One benefit of the ESI is the rapid
identification of patients that need immediate
attention. The focus of ESI triage is on quick sorting
of patients in the setting of constrained resources. In
part, ESI triage returns to the fundamental purpose
of triage as it was originally defined in the days of
Napoleon's army. ESI triage is a rapid sorting into
five groups with clinically meaningful differences in
projected resource needs and therefore, associated
operational needs. Use of the ESI for this rapid
sorting can lead to improved flow of patients
through the ED. Once an ESI triage level is assigned,
the patient can be directed to a more complete
assessment, registration, initial treatment, or waiting
based on their acuity and their presumed resource
needs. For example, level-1 and 2 patients can be
taken directly to the treatment area for rapid
evaluation and treatment, while level-4 and 5
patients can go to registration and then be sent to
the waiting room to await an available bed.

An important issue that is independent of ESI triage
is the timing of the complete nursing assessment.
Many believe that a complete assessment need not
be done at the initial triage station, but rather can
occur in the main treatment area or secondary triage
area as appropriate to the needs of each patient and
the current activity level of the ED (Gilboy et al.,
1999). Only the assessment necessary to make an
ESI assignment is required at triage in order to
facilitate the initial sorting of patients.
Comprehensive clinical assessments take significant
time to complete and, when done at triage, can
delay care and reduce satisfaction for patients with
more minor emergencies. With increasing patient
volumes and complexity contributing to ED
overcrowding, it is time to reconsider conventional
processes of care to increase efficiency and
effectiveness. However, it is always important to
gain sufficient information to be able to determine
the correct triage category. This is especially true
when waits are long to see the physician, as is
frequently the case with increased volumes. Triage
has become even more crucial with extended
waiting room times. Assignment of an inappropriate
low triage category can increase the risk of a bad
outcome due to the associated long wait.

Other benefits of the ESI include discrimination of
patients who do not need to be seen in the main
ED, but could safely and more efficiently be seen in
a fast-track or urgent care center. For example, in
many hospitals, the triage policy stipulates that all
ESI level 4 and 5 patients can be sent to either the
medical urgent care or minor trauma areas of the
ED. The triage policy also allows for some level-3
patients to be sent to urgent care (UC), such as
patients needing simple migraine headache
treatment. ESI level-3 patients triaged to UC and all
patients sent to the acute area from UC for more
serious conditions are monitored in the quality
improvement program. Nurses using the ESI have
reported that the tool facilitates communication of
patient acuity more effectively than the former
three-level triage scales used at the sites (Wuerz et
al., 2001). For example, the triage nurse can tell the
charge nurse, “I need a bed for a level 2 patient,”
and through this common language, the charge
nurse understands what is needed without a detailed
explanation of the patient by the triage nurse.

The ESI has also been used as the foundation for ED
policies that address specific populations. For
example, the psychiatric service at one site is
expected to provide consults for level 2 and 3
patients within 30 minutes and for level 4 and 5
patients within one hour of notification. At another
site, the ESI has been incorporated into a policy for
patients greater than 20-weeks pregnant who
present to the ED. Patients rated at ESI levels 1 and 2
are treated in the ED by emergency medicine with
an obstetrical consult. Those rated 3, 4, or 5 are
triaged to the labor and delivery area of the hospital.

The ESI is also a useful tool for determination of
thresholds for diversion of ambulance patients from
the ED. The ED Diversion Policy and Guidelines at
Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston defines
maximum capacity as 100 percent of RN-staffed ED
beds occupied. ESI is used to determine overcapacity.

Research has shown that the ESI is a reliable, valid
tool for rating triage acuity. The system has been
adopted by a variety of EDs in different regions of
the United States and in both academic and
community settings. The participating hospitals
have demonstrated the value of the ESI for
improved ED operations and patient care. Wider
adoption of the ESI by U.S. hospitals could lead to
the establishment of a standard for triage acuity
assessment, which will facilitate benchmarking,
public health surveillance and research.

### Chapter 3. Introduction to the Emergency Severity Index

The Emergency Severity Index (ESI) is a simple to
use, five-level triage instrument that categorizes
emergency department patients by evaluating both
patient acuity and resources. Initially the triage
nurse assesses only acuity level. If a patient does not
meet high acuity level criteria (ESI level 1 or 2), the
triage nurse then evaluates expected resource needs
to help determine a triage level (ESI level 3, 4, or 5).
Inclusion of resource needs in the triage rating is a
unique feature of the ESI in comparison with other
triage systems. Acuity is determined by the stability
of vital functions and potential for life, limb, or
organ threat. The triage nurse estimates resource
needs based on previous experience with patients
presenting with similar injuries or complaints.
Resource needs are defined as the number of
resources a patient is expected to consume in order
for a disposition decision to be reached. Once
appropriately oriented to the algorithm, the triage
nurse will be able to rapidly and accurately triage
patients into one of five explicitly defined and
mutually exclusive levels. The ESI provides
emergency departments with a valid, reliable triage
system (Eitel, Travers, Rosenau, Gilboy & Wuerz,
2003; Travers, Waller, Bowling, Flowers & Tintinalli,
2002; Wuerz, Travers, Gilboy, Eitel, Rosenau &
Yazhari, 2001; Tanabe, Gimbel, Yarnold, Kyriacou, &
Adams, 2004; Tanabe, Gimbel, Yarnold, & Adams,
2004).

In this chapter, we present a step-by-step description
of how to triage with the ESI algorithm. Subsequent
chapters explain key concepts in more detail and
provide numerous examples to clarify the finer
points of ESI application.

Algorithms are frequently used in emergency care.
Most emergency clinicians are familiar with the
algorithms used in courses such as Basic Life
Support, Advanced Cardiac Life Support, and the
Trauma Nursing Core Course. These courses present
a step-by-step approach to clinical decision making
that the clinician is able to internalize with practice.
Each step of the algorithm tells the user what
questions to ask or what information to gather.
Based on the data or answers obtained, a decision is
made and the algorithm directs the user to the next
step, and ultimately to an outcome.

Triage with the ESI algorithm requires the
experienced ED nurse to start at the top of the
algorithm. A conceptual overview of the ESI
algorithm is presented in Figure 3-1 to illustrate the
major ESI decision points. The actual ESI algorithm
is described in detail later in this chapter (Figure
3-1a). The algorithm uses four decision points (A, B,
C, and D) to sort patients into one of the five triage
levels (Figure 3-1). With practice, the triage nurse
will be able to rapidly move from one ESI decision
point to the next.

##### Decision Point A: Is the Patient Dying?

Simply stated, at decision point A (Figure 3-2) the
triage nurse asks if this patient is dying. If the
answer is “yes,” the triage process is complete and
the patient is automatically triaged as ESI level 1. A
“no” answer moves the user to the next step in the
algorithm, decision point B.

The following question is used to determine
whether the patient is dying (conceptual algorithm):
Does the patient require immediate life-saving
intervention? The following questions are helpful in
determining whether the patient meets level-1
criteria:

- Does the patient require an immediate airway,
medication, or other hemodynamic
intervention?

- Does the patient meet any of the following
criteria: already intubated, apneic, pulseless,
severe respiratory distress, SpO2 < 90 percent,
acute mental status changes, or unresponsive?

Research has demonstrated that the triage nurse is
able to accurately predict the need for immediate
interventions (Tanabe et al., in press). Table 3-1 lists
interventions that are considered life saving and
those that are not, for the purposes of ESI triage.

Interventions not considered life saving include
some interventions that are diagnostic or
therapeutic, but none that would “save a life.” Lifesaving interventions are aimed at securing an
airway, maintaining breathing, or supporting
circulation. Listed below are additional questions
that may be helpful in determining whether the
patient requires a life-saving intervention.

- Does this patient have a patent airway?

- Is the patient breathing?

- Does the patient have a pulse?

- Is the nurse concerned about the pulse rate,
rhythm, and quality?

- Was this patient intubated pre-hospital because
of concerns about the patient's ability to
maintain a patent airway, spontaneously breathe,
or maintain oxygen saturation?

- Is the nurse concerned about this patient's ability
to deliver adequate oxygen to the tissues?

The ESI level-1 patient always presents to the
emergency department with an unstable condition.
Because the patient could die without immediate
care a team response is initiated; the physician is at
the bedside, and nursing is providing intensive care.
ESI level-1 patients are seen immediately because
timeliness of interventions can affect morbidity and
mortality.

Immediate physician involvement in the care of the
patient is a key difference between ESI level-1 and 2
patients. Level-1 patients are critically ill and require
immediate physician evaluation and interventions.
Conversely, while level-2 patients are also very ill,
the emergency nurse can initiate care through
protocols without a physician at the bedside. The
nurse recognizes that the patient needs
interventions but is confident that the patient's
clinical condition will not deteriorate. The
emergency nurse can initiate intravenous access,
administer supplemental oxygen, obtain an ECG,
and place the patient on a cardiac monitor, all
before a physician presence is needed.

When considering the need for immediate lifesaving interventions, the triage nurse also carefully
evaluates the patients' respiratory status and oxygen
saturation (SpO2). A patient in severe respiratory
distress or with an SpO2 < 90 percent may still be
breathing, but is in need of immediate intervention
to maintain an airway and oxygenation status. This
is the patient who will require the physician in the
room ordering medications such as those used for
rapid sequence intubation or preparing for other
interventions for airway and breathing.

Patients with chest pain must also be evaluated
using the same criteria. Some patients presenting
with chest pain are very stable. Although they may
require a diagnostic ECG, these patients do not meet
level-1 criteria. However, patients who are pale,
diaphoretic, in acute respiratory distress or
hemodynamically unstable will require immediate
life-saving interventions and do meet level-1 criteria.
Each patient with chest pain must still be evaluated
within the context of the level-1 criteria to
determine whether the patient requires an
immediate life-saving intervention.

When determining whether the patient requires
immediate life-saving intervention, the triage nurse
must also assess the patient's level of consciousness.
The ESI algorithm uses the AVPU (alert, verbal, pain,
unresponsive) scale, (see Table 3-2). The goal for this
part of the algorithm is to identify the patient who
has an acute change in level of consciousness. The
triage nurse needs to assess this patient for a change
from baseline and the critical concern is the
formerly alert patient who is now labeled a P (pain)
or U (unresponsive). Unresponsiveness is assessed in
the context of acute changes in neurological status,
not for the patient who has known developmental
delays, documented dementia, or aphasia. Any
patient who is unresponsive, including the
intoxicated patient unresponsive to painful stimuli
meets level-1 criteria and should receive immediate
evaluation. An example of an acute mental status
change that would require immediate intervention
would be a patient with decreased mental status
who is unable to maintain an airway or has severe
respiratory distress.

Previous users of ESI version 3 (v. 3) will note a
major change in the ESI level-1 criteria. The key
difference between ESI v. 3 and ESI version 4 (v. 4) is
the identification and re-classification of some of the
sickest, previously ESI level-2 patients. Patients
requiring immediate life-saving intervention are
now classified as ESI level 1. In the previous ESI
version, a patient in severe respiratory distress who
required intubation but was still breathing was
categorized as ESI level 2. In the current version, this
patient meets level-1 criteria. Other examples of
patients now classified as ESI level 1 include a weak
and dizzy patient with a heart rate of 30 or 200.
Although this change may not affect a large number
of patients, it will result in the accurate
categorization of the most acutely ill patients. Prior
to v. 4, triage nurses were frequently confronted
with two distinct levels of ESI level-2 patients;
patients who required immediate evaluation and
patients who could wait a brief time (10 minutes or
so) without clinical deterioration. This dilemma led
to a large, multi-center, prospective study that was
conducted to identify characteristics of ESI level-2
patients who actually received immediate
interventions (Tanabe et al., in press). Results from
that multicenter study were the impetus for
modifying the ESI system. This updated edition of
the ESI handbook presents the changes and
describes ESI v. 4.

An ESI level-1 patient is not always brought to the
emergency department by ambulance. The patient
with a drug overdose or acute alcohol intoxication
may be dropped at the front door. Children may be
brought by car and carried into the emergency
department. The experienced triage nurse is able to
instantly identify this critical patient. With a brief,
across-the-room assessment the triage nurse
recognizes the patient that is in extremis. This
patient is taken immediately to the treatment area
and resuscitation efforts are initiated.

Patients assessed as an ESI level 1 constitute
approximately 1 percent to 3 percent of all ED
patients (Eitel et al., 2003; Wuerz, Milne, Eitel,
Travers & Gilboy, 2000; Wuerz et al., 2001). Upon
arrival, the patient's condition requires immediate
resuscitation from either the emergency physician
and nurse or the trauma or code team. From ESI
research we know that most ESI level-1 patients are
admitted to intensive care units, while some die in
the emergency department (Eitel et al., 2003; Wuerz,
2001). A few ESI level-1 patients are discharged from
the ED, if they have a reversible change in level of
consciousness or vital functions such as
hypoglycemia, seizures, alcohol intoxication, or
anaphylaxis.

Examples of ESI level 1:

- Cardiac arrest.

- Respiratory arrest.

- Severe respiratory distress.

- SpO2 < 90.

- Critically injured trauma patient who presents
unresponsive.

- Overdose with a respiratory rate of 6.

Three broad questions are used to determine
whether the patient meets level-2 criteria.

1. Is this a high-risk situation?

2. Is the patient confused, lethargic or disoriented?

3. Is the patient in severe pain or distress?

The triage nurse obtains pertinent subjective and
objective information to quickly answer these
questions. A brief introduction to ESI level-2 criteria
is presented here, while a more detailed explanation
of patients who meet ESI level-2 criteria will be
presented in Chapter 4.

- Severe respiratory distress with agonal or gaspingtype respirations.

- Severe bradycardia or tachycardia with signs of
hypoperfusion.

- Hypotension with signs of hypoperfusion.

- Trauma patient who requires immediate
crystalloid and colloid resuscitation.

- Chest pain, pale, diaphoretic, blood pressure
70/palp.

- Weak and dizzy, heart rate = 30.

- Anaphylactic reaction.

- Baby that is flaccid.

- Unresponsive with strong odor of ETOH.

- Hypoglycemia with a change in mental status.

##### Decision Point B: Should the Patient Wait?

Once the triage nurse has determined that the
patient does not meet the criteria for ESI level 1, the
triage nurse moves to decision point B (see Figure 33). At decision point B the nurse needs to decide
whether this patient should wait to be seen. If the
patient should not wait, the patient is triaged as ESI
level 2. If the patient can wait, then the user moves
to the next step in the algorithm.

###### Is This a High-risk Situation?

Based on a brief patient interview, gross
observations, and finally the “sixth sense” that
comes from experience, the triage nurse identifies
the patient who is high risk. Frequently the patient's
age and past medical history influence the triage
nurse's determination of risk. A high-risk patient is
one whose condition could easily deteriorate or a
patient who presents with symptoms suggestive of a
condition requiring time-sensitive treatment. This is
a patient who has a potential major life or organ
threat. A high-risk patient does not require a
detailed physical assessment or even a full set of
vital signs in most cases. The patient may describe a
clinical portrait that the experienced triage nurse
recognizes as a high-risk situation. An example of
such a portrait is the patient who states, “I never get
headaches and I lifted this heavy piece of furniture
and now I have the worst headache of my life.” The
triage nurse would triage this patient as ESI level 2
because the symptoms suggest the possibility of a
subarachnoid hemorrhage.

When the patient is an ESI level 2, the triage nurse
has determined that it would be unsafe for the
patient to remain in the waiting room for any
length of time. While ESI does not suggest specific
time intervals, ESI level-2 patients remain a high
priority and generally placement and treatment
should be initiated within 10 minutes of arrival. It is
important to remember that while the level-1
criteria have expanded with v. 4 of the algorithm,
ESI level-2 patients are still considered very ill and at
high risk. The need for care is immediate and an
appropriate bed needs to be found. Usually, rather
than move to the next patient, the triage nurse feels
that this patient is so sick that the charge nurse or
staff in the patient care area should be immediately
alerted that they have an ESI level 2.

Examples of high-risk situations:

- Active chest pain, suspicious for coronary
syndrome, but does not require an immediate
life-saving intervention, stable.

- A needle stick in a health care worker.

- Signs of a stroke, but does not meet level-1
criteria.

- A rule-out ectopic pregnancy, hemodynamically
stable.

- A patient on chemotherapy, and therefore
immunocompromised, with a fever.

- A suicidal or homicidal patient.

Chapter 4 contains additional information on highrisk situations.

###### Is the Patient Confused, Lethargic, or Disoriented?

This is the second question to be asked at decision
point B. Again the concern is whether the patient is
demonstrating an acute change in level of
consciousness. Patients with a baseline mental status
of confusion do not meet level-2 criteria.

- Confused: Inappropriate response to stimuli,
decrease in attention span and memory.

- Lethargic: Drowsy, sleeping more than usual,
responds appropriately when stimulated.

- Disoriented: The patient is unable to answer
questions correctly about time, place or person.

Examples of patients who are confused, lethargic, or
disoriented:

- New onset of confusion in an elderly patient.

- The 3-month-old whose mother reports the child
is sleeping all the time.

- The adolescent found confused and disoriented.

Each of these examples indicates that the brain may
be either structurally or chemically compromised.

###### Is This Patient in Severe Pain or Distress?

The third question the triage nurse needs to answer
at decision point B is whether this patient is
currently in pain or distress. If the answer is “no,”
the triage nurse is able to move to the next step in
the algorithm. If the answer is “yes,” the triage nurse
needs to assess the level of pain or distress. This is
determined by clinical observation and/or a selfreported pain rating of 7 or higher on a scale of 0 to
10. When patients report pain ratings of 7/10 or
greater, the triage nurse may triage the patient as ESI
level 2, but is not required to assign a level-2 rating.
Pain is one of the most common reasons for an ED
visit and clearly all patients reporting pain 7/10 or
greater do not need to be assigned an ESI level-2
triage rating. A patient with a sprained ankle and
pain of 8/10 is a good example of an ESI level-4
patient. It is not necessary to rate this patient as a
level 2 based on pain alone.

In some patients, pain can be assessed by clinical
observation: distressed facial expression, diaphoresis,
body posture, and changes in vital signs. The triage
nurse observes physical responses to acute pain that
support the patient's rating. For example, the patient
with abdominal pain who is diaphoretic,
tachycardic, and has an elevated blood pressure; or
the patient with severe flank pain, vomiting, pale
skin, and a history of renal colic are both good
examples of patients that meet ESI level-2 criteria.
Chapter 4 provides additional information on ESI
level 2 and pain.

Severe distress can be physiological or psychological.
Examples of distress include the sexual assault
victim, the combative patient, or the bipolar patient
who is currently manic.

ESI level-2 patients constitute a relatively low
volume, high-risk group that comprise 20 percent to
30 percent of emergency department patients
(Travers et al., 2002; Wuerz et al., 2001, Tanabe,
Gimbel et al., 2004). Once an ESI level-2 patient is
identified, the triage nurse needs to ensure that the
patient is cared for in a timely manner. Registration
can be completed by a family member or at the
bedside. ESI level-2 patients need vital signs and a
comprehensive nursing assessment but not
necessarily at triage. Placement should not be
delayed to finish obtaining vital signs. ESI research
has shown that 50 to 60 percent of ESI level-2
patients are admitted from the ED (Wuerz et al.,
2001).

##### Decision Point C: Resource Needs

If the answers to the questions at the first two
decision points are “no,” then the triage nurse
moves to decision point C (see Figure 3-4). The
triage nurse should ask, “How many different
resources do you think this patient is going to
consume in order for the physician to reach a
disposition decision?” The disposition decision
could be to send the patient home, admit to the
observation unit, admit to the hospital, or even to
transfer to another institution. This decision point
again requires the triage nurse to draw from past
experiences in caring for similar emergency
department patients. ED nurses need to clearly
understand that the estimate of resources has to do
with standards of care and is independent of type of
hospital (i.e., teaching or non-teaching) and
location. A patient presenting to any emergency
department should consume the same general
resources in order for a disposition to be reached.
Considering the patient's brief subjective and
objective assessment, past medical history, allergies,
medications, age, and gender, how many different
resources will be used in order for the physician to
reach a disposition? In other words, what is typically
done for the patient who presents to the emergency
department with this common complaint? The
triage nurse is asked to do this based on his or her
assessment of the patient and should not consider
individual practice patterns, but rather the routine
practice in the particular ED.

To identify resource needs the triage nurse must be
familiar with emergency department standards of
care. The triage nurse must be knowledgeable about
the concept of “prudent and customary.” One easy
way to think about this concept is to ask the
question “Given this patient's chief complaint or
injury, what resources is the emergency physician
likely to utilize?” Resources can be hospital services,
tests, procedures, consults or interventions that are
above and beyond the physician history and
physical, or very simple emergency department
interventions such as applying a bandage. Further
explanations and examples are provided in Chapter 5.

A list of what is and what is not considered a
resource for purposes of ESI triage classification can
be found in Table 3-3. ESI level-3 patients are
predicted to require two or more resources; ESI level4 patients are predicted to require one resource; and
ESI level-5 patients are predicted to require no
resources (Table 3-4).

Research has shown that ESI level-3 patients make
up 30 percent to 40 percent of patients seen in the
emergency department (Eitel et al., 2003; Wuerz et
al., 2001). They often require a more in-depth
evaluation but are felt to be stable in the short term,
and certainly may have a longer length of stay in
the ED. ESI level 4 and ESI level 5 make up between
20 percent and 35 percent of ED volume, perhaps
even more in a community with poor primary care
access. Appropriately trained mid-level providers
with the right skills mix could care for these patients
in a fast-track or express care setting, recognizing
that a high proportion of these patients have a
trauma-related presenting complaint. Since their
physical condition is stable, these patients could
safely wait several hours to be seen.

##### Decision Point D:The Patient's Vital Signs

Before assigning a patient to ESI level 3, the nurse
needs to look at the patient's vital signs and decide
whether they are outside the accepted parameters
for age and are felt by the nurse to be meaningful. If
the vital signs are outside accepted parameters, the
triage nurse should consider upgrading the triage
level to ESI level 2. However, it is the triage nurse’s
decision as to whether or not the patient should be
upgraded to an ESI level 2 based on vital sign
abnormalities. This is decision point D.

Vital sign parameters are outlined by age (see Figure
3-5). The vital signs used are pulse, respiratory rate,
and oxygen saturation and, for any child under age
three, body temperature. Using the vital sign criteria,
the triage nurse can upgrade an adult patient who
presents with a heart rate of 104, or this patient can
remain ESI level 3. A 6-month-old baby with a cold
and a respiratory rate of 48 could be triaged ESI level
2 or 3. Based on the patient's history and physical
assessment, the nurse must ask if the vital signs are
enough of a concern to say that the patient is high
risk and cannot wait to be seen. Chapter 6 explains
vital signs in detail and gives examples.

Temperature is only included with children under
age three. Significant fever may exclude young
children from categories 4 and 5. This will help
identify potentially bacteremic children and avoid
sending them to a fast track setting or waiting a
prolonged time. Pediatric fever guidelines will be
described in detail in Chapter 6.

###### Does Time to Treatment Influence ESI Triage Categories?

An estimate of how long the patient can wait to be
seen by a physician is an important component of
most triage systems. The Australasian and Canadian
Triage Systems require patients to be seen by a
physician within a specific time period, based on
their triage category. ESI does not mandate specific
time standards in which patients must be evaluated
by a physician. However, patients who meet criteria
for ESI level 2 should be seen as soon as possible; it
is up to the individual institution to determine a
policy. Frequently, there may be confusion between
institutional policy and “flow or process of patient
care” and ESI triage level.

We will describe four patient scenarios in which
flow and triage category may seem to conflict. Often
trauma patients present to the triage nurse after
sustaining a significant mechanism of injury, such as
an unrestrained passenger in a high-speed motor
vehicle crash. The patient may have left the crash
scene in some way other than by ambulance, and
then presents to triage with localized right upper
quadrant pain with stable vital signs. This patient is
physiologically stable, walked into the ED and does
not meet ESI level-1 criteria. However, the patient is
at high risk for a liver laceration and other
significant trauma, so should be triaged as ESI level
2. Frequently, EDs have trauma policies and trauma
response level categorization that will require rapid
initiation of care. Triage and trauma response level
are both important and should be recorded as two
different scores. While the triage nurse recognizes
this is a physiologically stable trauma patient and
correctly assigns ESI level 2, she should facilitate
patient placement and trauma care as outlined by
the trauma policy. The patient is probably stable for
another 10 minutes and does not require immediate
life-saving interventions. If the same patient
presented with a blood pressure of 80 palpable, they
would be triaged as ESI level 1 and require
immediate hemodynamic, life-saving interventions.

Another example of policies that may affect triage
level is triage of the patient with stable chest pain. If
the patient is physiologically stable but experiencing
chest pain that is potentially an acute coronary
syndrome, the patient meets ESI level-2 criteria.
They do not require immediate life-saving
interventions but they are a high-risk patient. Their
care is time-sensitive, an ECG should be performed
within 10 minutes of patient arrival. Often, EDs will
have a policy related to rapid initiation of an ECG.
While care of these patients should be rapidly
initiated, the ECG is not a life-saving intervention, it
is a diagnostic procedure. If the triage nurse were to
triage all chest pain patients as ESI level 1, it would
be difficult to prioritize the care for true ESI level-1
patients who require immediate life-saving
interventions. But the patient with chest pain who
presents to triage diaphoretic, with a blood pressure
of 80 palpable would meet ESI level-1 criteria.

The third example of time-sensitive care is patients
who present with signs of an acute stroke. Again, if
physiologically stable, a 10 minute wait to initiate
care will probably not further compromise the
patient. However, the patient with signs of stroke
that is unable to maintain an airway meets ESI level1 criteria.

Finally, a somewhat different scenario is an elderly
patient that fell, may have a fractured hip, arrives by
private car with family, and is in pain. The patient
does not really meet ESI level-2 criteria but is very
uncomfortable. The triage nurse would categorize
the patient as ESI level 3 and probably place the
patient in an available bed before other ESI level-3
patients. Ambulance patients may also present with
a similar scenario. Arriving by ambulance is not a
criterion to assign a patient ESI level 1 or 2. The ESI
criteria should always be used to determine triage
level without regard to method of arrival.

In general, care of ESI level-2 patients should be
rapidly facilitated and patients should ideally wait
no longer than 10 minutes to be placed in the
treatment area. It is important to remember that
while ESI v. 4 has expanded level-1 criteria to
include patients requiring immediate interventions
that were previously ESI level 2, all level-2 patients
are still potentially very ill and require rapid
initiation of care and evaluation. The triage nurse
has determined that it is unsafe for these patients to
wait. Patients may currently be stable, but also have
a condition that can easily deteriorate, and/or
initiation of diagnostic treatment may be time
sensitive (stable chest pain requires an ECG in 10
minutes of arrival), or the patient has a potential
major life or organ threat. ESI level-2 patients are
still considered to be very high risk.

In the current atmosphere of ED overcrowding, it is
not uncommon for the triage nurse to be in a
situation of triaging many ESI level-2 patients with
no open ED beds in which to place the patients. In
these situations, the triage nurse may be tempted to
“undertriage.” This can lead to serious, negative
patient outcomes and an under-representation of
the ED's overall case mix. When faced with multiple
ESI level-2 patients simultaneously, the triage nurse
must evaluate each patient according to the ESI
algorithm. Then, the nurse can “triage” all level-2
patients to determine which patient(s) are at highest
risk, in order to facilitate patient placement based on
this evaluation.

##### Summary

In summary, the ESI is a five-level triage system that
is simple to use and divides patients by acuity and
resource needs. The ESI triage algorithm is based on
four key decision points. The experienced ED RN
will be able to rapidly and accurately triage patients
using this system.

### Chapter 4. ESI Level 2

This chapter expands on the introduction to the ESI
based on the experienced ED nurse's sound clinical
judgment. During the ESI triage educational 
program, a considerable amount of time should be
devoted to explaining which types of patients
should be categorized ESI level 2. In this chapter, we
highlight common patient presentations that meet
ESI level-2 criteria.

After the triage nurse has determined that the
patient does not require immediate life-saving
intervention, he or she must then decide whether
the patient should wait. When making this decision,
the triage nurse should consider the following
question “Would I use my last open bed for this
patient?” The following three questions listed in
Figure 4-1 should be answered and are key
components of ESI level-2 criteria:

1. Is this a high-risk situation?

2. Is the patient experiencing new onset confusion,
lethargy, or disorientation?

3. Is the patient experiencing severe pain or
distress?

The remainder of this chapter discusses the decision
points of ESI level 2 in detail. Many examples are
provided that are based on the potential medical
diagnoses associated with patients' chief complaints
and presenting symptoms. An experienced triage
nurse will always assess the patient's chief
complaint, presenting signs and symptoms,
demographics, and medical history to attempt to
identify a high-risk situation. While the purpose of
nurse triage is not to make a medical diagnosis,
these situations are based on the experienced triage
nurse's knowledge of possible medical diagnoses that
are associated with specific chief complaints. A good
source of information about the signs and
symptoms of various medical diagnoses is the
Emergency Nursing Core Curriculum[©] or other
emergency nursing textbooks. The following
discussion provides some selected examples of highrisk situations. This discussion is not intended to be
an exhaustive list. The examples are summarized in
Table 4-1.

##### High-risk Situations

The ability to recognize a high-risk situation is a
critical element of the triage decisionmaking
process, regardless of the particular triage system
used. ESI highlights the importance of recognizing
high-risk situations and uses the triage nurse's
expertise and experience to identify patients at high
risk.

Little has been written about how ED triage nurses
make decisions. Knowledge and experience are
necessary but not sufficient. The other factor that we
have found to be important is gut instinct or the
sixth sense. Novice triage nurses should be taught
rules of thumb which they can use until they have
the confidence and experience upon which to make
rapid, accurate decisions. Examples of these rules of
thumb include “all women of childbearing age are
pregnant until proven otherwise” or “all chest pain
is cardiac until proven otherwise.” Novice triage
nurses are also taught symptom clustering such as
the cardiac cluster of chest pain with nausea,
shortness of breath, and diaphoresis. From prior
clinical situations ED nurses put together what have
been referred to as clinical portraits. The nurse puts
into long-term memory particular patient scenarios
in which they were involved in some way. For
example, the patient with fever, stiff neck, and a
meningococcal rash will always come to mind when
a patient with a similar complaint presents to triage.
The triage nurse needs to draw on all of his or her
knowledge and experience with each triage
encounter. High-risk situations should be easy for
the experienced triage nurse to identify.

Vital signs are often not helpful in the identification
of high-risk patients. The patient typically presents
to the ED with a chief complaint, signs and
symptoms, or history suggestive of a problem or
condition that is serious and, unless dealt with
promptly, can deteriorate rapidly. Often patient age,
past medical history, and current medications
influence the perceived severity of the chief
complaint. For example, a frail elderly patient with
severe abdominal pain is at a much higher risk of
morbidity and mortality than a 20-year-old. The
elderly patient with abdominal pain should be
classified as ESI level 2, while the 20-year-old with
stable vital signs will usually be classified as ESI level
3. It is common for the triage nurse to identify a
high-risk situation which may then be confirmed by
finding abnormal vital signs. For example, a patient
who complains of a fever and productive cough may
be found to have a respiratory rate of 32 and an
oxygen saturation of 90 percent. The experienced
triage nurse uses knowledge and expertise to
recognize that this patient probably has pneumonia,
is at risk for desaturating and is therefore high risk.
Inexperienced ED nurses are not likely to have the
knowledge and expertise to consistently identify
high-risk situations and make accurate triage
decisions. For this reason, the inexperienced triage
nurse is, in fact, a liability at triage, regardless of the
particular triage system used. They have not
incorporated symptom clustering, clinical portraits,
or “gut instinct” into their practice; such approaches
are key in identifying the high-risk patient situation.
The next section will provide specific examples of
high-risk situations.

###### Abdominal and Gastrointestinal

Abdominal pain is a frequent chief complaint in the
ED. What makes it high risk? A good history and
assessment of current pain rating, respiratory rate,
and heart rate are important elements to consider
and will help determine the presence of a high-risk
situation. Pain rating is only one of many factors to
consider. Tachycardia or respiratory distress that
accompanies severe abdominal pain can represent
shock and would place the patient at high risk. The
elderly patient with severe abdominal pain presents
another potentially risky situation. Often the elderly
experience bowel obstructions, gastrointestinal
bleeds, and other abdominal complications
associated with significantly higher morbidity and
mortality than younger patients. Signs and
symptoms of an acute abdomen are important to
assess for in all patients with abdominal pain. How
long has the patient had the pain? What made the
patient come to the ED today? Has the patient had
severe nausea, vomiting, or diarrhea? Is the patient
dehydrated? Patients with severe “ripping”
abdominal pain radiating to the back should be
considered to potentially have an abdominal aortic
aneurysm. Patients describe the pain as severe,
constant, and sudden in onset and may have a
history of hypertension.

Patients with abdominal pain are often initially
considered ESI level 3 at the beginning of the triage
interview, and after the discovery of tachycardia or
other risk factors, the triage nurse may determine
that the patient is indeed high risk.

Vomiting blood or a chief complaint of blood per
rectum should be seriously considered and evaluated
in the context of vital signs. A 30-year-old with
bright red blood per rectum, normal vital signs, and
no other risk factors does not meet criteria for ESI
level 2. But the elderly patient who called an
ambulance because he started vomiting blood and
has a heart rate of 117 and a respiratory rate of 24 is
high risk and does meet ESI level-2 criteria.

###### Cardiovascular

Chest pain is also a very common chief complaint.
The presentation of acute coronary syndromes (ACS)
is not always specific, and it is sometimes difficult to
determine the risk of ACS at triage. Patients who
have an episode of chest or epigastric discomfort,
with or without accompanying symptoms, usually
will need an ECG performed rapidly to determine
the presence of ACS and need to be identified as
high risk-ESI level 2. It is important for the triage
nurse to incorporate into his or her knowledge of
women and presentational symptoms characteristic
of heart disease. The 54-year-old obese female who
presents to the ED with epigastric pain and fatigue is
at risk of ACS and should be assigned to ESI level 2high risk. Patients with chest pain that are
physiologically unstable and require immediate
intervention such as intubation or hemodynamic
support should be triaged as ESI level 1. All chest
pain patients do not meet level-1 or 2 criteria. For
example, a 20-year-old healthy patient with chest
pain, cough, and fever of 101° is at low risk for ACS
and does not meet ESI level-1 or 2 criteria. Each
patient must be assessed individually. Other highrisk cardiovascular situations would include the
possibility of a hypertensive crisis, acute vascular
arterial occlusions, and patients who present with a
fever post valve replacement.

###### Dental, Ear, Nose, and Throat

Although less common, epiglottitis still exists and
represents a potential airway threat. Patients with a
peritonsilar abscess are another example of potential
airway compromise and both conditions represent a
high-risk situation. If a patient with either of these
complaints is in immediate danger of airway
compromise and requires immediate intervention,
level-1 criteria are met. For patients with epistaxis,
the triage nurse should obtain a blood pressure,
although this is not in the ESI algorithm. Epistaxis
could be caused by a posterior nosebleed due to a
hypertensive crisis, nose picking by the patient on
Coumadin®, or recent cocaine use. In any case, such
patients should be classified as ESI level 2, as they
represent a high-risk situation.

###### Environmental

Patients with inhalation injuries should be
considered high risk for potential airway
compromise. If the patient presents with significant
airway distress and requires immediate intervention,
they meet level-1 criteria.

###### Facial

Patients with trauma to the face should be evaluated
for possible facial fractures. When present, facial
fractures are often associated with other severe
trauma and may potentially lead to airway
compromise and should therefore be triaged as high
risk. Facial trauma with actual airway compromise
should be triaged as ESI level 1 to facilitate airway
management High-risk of airway compromise
should be triaged as ESI level 2.

###### General Medical

There are several other general medical complaints
that need to be considered for possible high-risk
situations. These medical complications include
diabetic ketoacidosis, hyper- or hypoglycemia,
sepsis, complaints of syncope or near syncope, and a
variety of other electrolyte disturbances that may
need to be treated immediately. Hyperkalemia in
particular is a very high-risk situation that can lead
to serious cardiac dysrhythmias. Hyperkalemia
might be suspected in a renal dialysis patient
exhibiting weakness. Finally, oncology patients with
a fever who are undergoing chemotherapy are at risk
for sepsis and should be identified as high risk and
rapidly evaluated.

###### Genitourinary

Males with testicular torsion will complain of severe
pain, are easily recognized, and require rapid
evaluation and surgical intervention, in addition to
rapid pain control. Renal dialysis patients unable to
complete dialysis are another example of a high-risk
genitourinary emergency, since a variety of
electrolyte disturbances may be present. Females,
and more commonly males, can present to the
triage nurse with acute urinary retention. Males over
age 65 often present with benign prostatic
hypertrophy and the inability to urinate. Males and
females can present postoperatively with the
inability to void. These patients are in acute distress
and require emergency urinary catheterization.
These are examples of patients in severe distress who
should be categorized as ESI level 2.

###### Mental Health

Many patients that present with mental health
problems are at high risk if they are a danger either
to themselves, others, or the environment. Patients
who are suicidal, homicidal, psychotic, violent, or
present an elopement risk should be considered high
risk. Intoxication without signs of trauma or
associated risk of aspiration does not represent a
high-risk criterion. The intoxicated patient needs to
be carefully assessed for signs of trauma or
behavioral issues related to alcohol use or past
medical history. Either could represent a high-risk
situation and the patient would be categorized ESI
level 2.

###### Neurological

Patients with severe headache associated with
mental status changes, high blood pressure, lethargy,
fevers, or a rash should be considered high risk. Any
patient with sudden onset of speech deficits or
motor weakness should also be assigned ESI level 2.
Patients with these symptoms may be experiencing
an acute stroke and immediate evaluation is critical.
Time from onset of symptoms is a critical factor in
determining treatment options, in particular
fibrinolytic or other therapies. A patient with no
past medical history of headaches that presents to
the emergency department with the sudden onset of
a headache should be identified as high risk for a
subarrachnoid bleed. The patient will often describe
exactly what they were doing when the headache
began, typically after lifting, having a bowel
movement, or after sexual intercourse.

###### Obstetrical and Gynecological

Females with abdominal pain or vaginal bleeding
should be carefully assessed and vital signs obtained
if there is no obvious life threat. Pregnancy history
and last menstrual period should always be
ascertained from all females of childbearing age. The
triage nurse should assess for signs and symptoms of
the following conditions in late pregnancy: abruptio
placentae and placenta previa. In early pregnancy
the triage nurse should assess for signs and
symptoms of ectopic pregnancy and spontaneous
abortion. All pregnant patients 14 to 20 weeks and
over should be seen by a physician rapidly,
according to individual institutional policy. A
postpartum patient with a chief complaint of heavy
vaginal bleeding should also be seen by a physician
urgently. Any female patient, whether pregnant or
postpartum, who presents with significant
hemodynamic instability and is in need of
immediate life-saving interventions should be
triaged as ESI level 1.

###### Ocular

Patients with trauma to the eye, sudden partial or
full loss of vision, or a chemical splash to the eye are
at high risk for permanent damage to the eye and
should be triaged at ESI level 2. Conditions
associated with some type of visual loss include
central retinal artery occlusion, acute narrow-angle
glaucoma, and retinal detachment. Trauma to the
eye can result in a globe rupture and hyphema.
Chemical splashes to the eye, particularly alkali,
necessitate immediate flushing to prevent further
damage to the cornea. All of these conditions
require immediate evaluation and treatment to
prevent further complications or deterioration.
These patients meet ESI level-2 criteria. While
immediate irrigation is necessary, it is not
considered life-saving and thus these patients do not
meet ESI level-1 criteria.

###### Orthopedic

Patients with signs and symptoms of compartment
syndrome are at high risk for extremity loss and
should be assigned ESI level 2. Other patients with
high-risk orthopedic injuries include any extremity
injury with compromised neurovascular function,
partial or complete amputations, or trauma
mechanisms identified as having a high-risk such as
serious acceleration or deceleration. Patients with
possible fractures of the pelvis, femur, or hip and
other extremity dislocations should be carefully
evaluated and vital signs considered. These fractures
can be associated with significant blood loss. Again,
the need for immediate life-saving intervention in
hemodynamically unstable patients will meet ESI
level-1 criteria.

###### Pediatrics

It is not uncommon for the triage nurse to be
uncomfortable when making triage acuity decisions
about children, especially infants. It is important to
obtain an accurate history from the caregiver and
evaluate the activity level of the child. The child
who is inconsolable or withdrawn may be at high
risk of serious illness. The following conditions are
examples of high-risk situations for children:

- Seizures.

- Sepsis, severe dehydration.

- Diabetic ketoacidosis.

- Child abuse, burns.

- Head trauma.

- Vitamins/iron or other overdoses/ingestions.

- Infant less than 28 days of age with a fever of
100.4° F or 38° C, or greater.

###### Transplant

Patients who are status post organ transplant are
usually ill and considered high risk. They can
present with organ rejection, sepsis, or other
complications. Patients who are on a transplant list
are also usually considered high risk.

###### Respiratory

There are many respiratory complaints that place
patients at high risk. Patients with mild-to-moderate
distress should be further evaluated for respiratory
rate and pulse oximetry to determine whether they
should be categorized ESI level 2. Patients in severe
respiratory distress that require immediate lifesaving intervention such as intubation meet level-1
criteria. The high-risk patient is one who is currently
ventilating and oxygenating adequately but is in
respiratory distress and has the potential to rapidly
deteriorate. Potential etiologies of respiratory distress
may include asthma, pulmonary embolus, pleural
effusion, pneumothorax, foreign body aspiration,
toxic smoke inhalation, or shortness of breath
associated with chest pain.

###### Toxicological

Most patients who present with an overdose should
be rapidly evaluated and represent a high-risk
situation. It is often difficult to determine which
drugs were taken and the quantities actually
consumed. If the patient has taken an intentional
overdose, and admits to suicidal ideation, this meets
criteria for a high-risk situation. A patient who is
apneic on arrival or requires other immediate lifesaving interventions should be categorized an ESI
level 1; all other admitted overdoses should be
considered ESI level 2.

###### Trauma

Frequently, patients who have been involved in a
traumatic event are at high risk for injury, although
no obvious injuries may be apparent. Any
mechanism of injury associated with a high risk of
injury should be categorized ESI level 2, unless they
present with unstable vital signs and require
immediate intervention. These patients should be
triaged as ESI level 1. Serious injury results from the
transfer of mechanical or kinetic energy and is
caused by acceleration forces, deceleration forces, or
both. Motor vehicle and motorcycle crashes, victims
of falls, and gunshot and stab wounds are examples
of blunt and penetrating trauma, which should be
assessed carefully for potential for serious injury. The
triage nurse should obtain the following details
regarding the injury: age of the patient, pre-existing
conditions of the patient and environment, distance
the patient fell or jumped, how fast the vehicle was
moving, history of loss of consciousness, location of
penetrating injury, and type of weapon. Again, the
nurse will draw from his or her knowledge of
biomechanics and mechanism of injury to assess the
patient and decide whether they meet ESI level-2
criteria. Gunshot wounds to the head, neck, chest,
or groin usually require trauma team evaluation and
immediate interventions and should be triaged as
ESI level 1.

###### Wound Management

What makes a wound high risk? Is there
uncontrolled bleeding? Is there arterial bleeding? Is
this a partial amputation? How was the wound
sustained and does the mechanism of injury leave
the patient at high risk for other traumatic
complications? Most wounds do not meet the
criteria for ESI level 2. A patient with a stab wound
to the subcutaneous tissue of the thigh with
controlled bleeding and good distal neurological
function can be classified as ESI level 4. Any
uncontrolled bleeding that requires immediate lifesaving intervention to stabilize the patient meets
level-1 criteria.

##### Confusion/Lethargy/ Disorientation

The second question to consider when determining
whether a patient meets level-2 criteria is “Does the
patient have new onset confusion, lethargy, or
disorientation?” Altered mental status is another
frequent chief complaint. Family members, friends,
or paramedics may accompany these patients to the
ED. At decision point B of the ESI algorithm, the
presence of confusion, lethargy, or disorientation
refers to new onset or an acute alteration in level of
consciousness (LOC). Chronic dementia and
confusion do not meet criteria for ESI level 2.
Confusion, lethargy, or disorientation may be caused
by a variety of serious medical conditions including
stroke, transient ischemic attack, and other
structural pathology to the brain, metabolic, and
electrolyte imbalances such as hypoglycemia or
hyponatremia and toxicological conditions.

This portion of the algorithm is usually very clear
and leaves very little open to interpretation. If the
patient's history is unknown and the patient
presents to triage confused, lethargic or disoriented,
the triage nurse should assume this condition is new
and select ESI level 2 as the triage category. Again, if
the patient has new onset confusion, lethargy or
disorientation and requires an immediate life-saving
intervention as previously described, the patient
then meets ESI level-1 criteria.

##### Severe Pain/Distress

The final question to address when determining
whether the patient meets level-2 criteria is “Does
the patient have severe pain or distress?” The patient
should be assessed for the presence of severe pain or
distress. All patients who have a pain rating of 7/10
or greater should be considered for meeting ESI level2 criteria.

_Considered is a very important word. It is up to the_
discretion of the triage nurse to determine whether
the clinical condition and pain rating in
combination warrant a rating of ESI level 2. For
example, a patient who had a heavy metal object
fall on his toe may rate the pain a 10/10. Indeed, the
patient may have a fracture and is experiencing
severe pain. The patient probably has done nothing
to try to relieve the pain prior to arrival in the ED.
The correct triage level for this patient would be ESI
level 4. Only one resource will be needed (an x-ray).
The triage nurse should implement comfort
measures at triage including ice, elevation, and
analgesics (if standing orders are in place) to reduce
the pain. The triage nurse should believe the
patient's pain is 10/10 and address the pain at triage.
However, this patient can wait to be seen and you
would certainly not use your last open bed for this
patient. In summary, the triage nurse assesses not
only the pain intensity rating provided by the
patient, but also the chief complaint, past medical
history and physiologic appearance of the patient
when determining a triage category. Examples of
patients for whom the triage nurse could use severe
pain criteria to justify an ESI level-2 rating include:

- A patient with 10/10 flank pain who is writhing
at triage.

- An 80-year-old female with 7/10 generalized
abdominal pain with severe nausea.

- A 30-year-old patient in acute sickle cell pain
crisis.

- An oncology patient with severe pain.

- Any full- or partial-thickness burn that will
require immediate pain control.

All ED patients are to be assessed for pain and asked
to rate their pain using a scale such as the visual
analog scale. Many triage nurses are uncomfortable
with documenting a patients pain rating and then
having them wait to be seen. It is important for the
triage nurse to understand that the patients self
reported pain rating is only one piece of the pain
assessment. For example, all ED triage nurses have
triaged patients who are laughing, talking on their
cell phone or eating chips but report their pain is
10+. Triage nurses should assign ESI level 2 if the
patient reports a pain rating of 7/10 or greater and
the triage nurse's subjective and objective assessment
confirms that the patient's pain requires
interventions that are beyond the scope of triage.
The triage nurse concludes that it would be
inappropriate for this patient to wait and they
would assign this patient to the last open bed.

Finally, in determining whether a patient meets ESI
level-2 criteria, the triage nurse must assess for severe
distress, which is defined as either physiological or
psychological. In addition to pain, patients
experiencing severe respiratory distress meet criteria
for ESI level 2 for physiological disturbances.
Examples of severe psychological distress include
patients who are:

- Distraught after experiencing a sexual assault.

- Exhibiting behavioral outbursts at triage.

- Combative.

- Victims of domestic violence.

- Experiencing an acute grief reaction.

These are patients that the triage nurse usually
prefers to have placed in the treatment area
immediately so as to have the patient avoid the
waiting room.

##### Summary

We have reviewed the key components and
questions that need to be answered to determine
whether a patient meets ESI level-2 criteria. It is
critical that the triage nurse consider these questions
as he or she triages each patient. “Missing” a highrisk situation may result in an extended waiting
period and potentially negative patient outcomes.

### Chapter 5. Expected Resource Needs

Traditionally, triage systems have been based solely
upon the acuity of the patient. Such systems require
the nurse to assign an acuity level by making a
judgment about how long the patient can wait to be
seen by a provider. The Emergency Severity Index
(ESI) triage system uses a novel approach to triage
level assignment by including not only judgments
about who should be seen first, but also for the less
acute patients, adding predictions of the resources
that are likely to be used to make a disposition for
the patient. This chapter includes background
information on why resource predictions were
included in the ESI and a description of what
constitutes a resource. Also included are examples of
patients rated ESI level 3 to 5 and the resources that
each patient is predicted to need.

Historically, comprehensive triage has been the
dominant model for triage acuity assignment in U.S.
emergency departments (Emergency Nurses
Association [ENA], 1997, p. 3-10; Gilboy, Travers &
Wuerz, 1999). Triage systems have been based on
the nurse’s assessment of vital signs, subjective and
objective information, past medical history, allergies,
and medications to determine triage acuity.

Resource prediction is an integral part of the ESI for
patients identified as ESI level 3, 4, or 5. It is
important to understand that resource allocation
does not have a role for patients of high acuity, e.g.
ESI level 1 or 2. Resource prediction distinguishes
the ESI from other triage systems that are based only
on acuity. When Drs. Wuerz and Eitel created the
ESI triage system, they added resource utilization to
provide additional data and allow a better, more
accurate triage decision. They believed that an
experienced emergency department (ED) triage
nurse was able to predict the nature and number of
tests, therapeutic interventions, and consultations
that a patient would need during his/her ED stay.
This has been verified in recent studies of ESI
implementation and validation, which have shown
that triage nurses are able to predict ED patients'
resource needs (Eitel, Travers, Rosenau, Gilboy &
Wuerz, 2003; Tanabe, Gimbel, Yarnold & Adams,
2004). One study was conducted at seven EDs
representing varied regions of the country, urban
and rural areas, and academic and community
hospitals. Nurses using the ESI were able to predict
how many resources the ED patients required 70
percent of the time. That is, ESI classification by
experienced triage nurses reasonably predicts at
triage how many resources patients will require to
reach ED disposition, but, more importantly,
discriminates at presentation low versus high
resource intensity patients. This differentiation by
resource requirements allows for much more
effective streaming of patients at ED presentation
into alternative operational pathways within the ED,
that is, the parallel processing of patients. Research
has also established that ESI triage levels correlate
with important patient outcomes, including
admission and mortality rates (Eitel et al., 2003).

Again, it is important to note that resource
prediction is only used for less acute patients. At
decision points A and B on the ESI algorithm (Figure
5-1), the nurse decides which patients meet criteria
for ESI levels 1 and 2 based only on patient acuity.
However, at decision point C, the nurse assigns ESI
levels 3 to 5 by assessing both acuity and predicted
resource needs. Thus, the triage nurse only considers
resources when the answers to decision points A and
B are “no.”

To identify ED patients' resource needs, the triage
nurse must be generally familiar with emergency
department standards of care, and, specifically, what
constitutes prudent and customary emergency care.
An easy way to think about this concept is to ask
the question, “Given this patient's chief complaint,
what resources are the emergency providers likely to
utilize?”

The triage nurse uses information from the brief
subjective and objective triage assessment, as well as
past medical history, medications, age, and gender,
to determine how many different resources will be
needed for the ED provider to reach a disposition.
For example, a healthy teenage patient with a
simple leg laceration and no prior medical history
would need only one resource: Suturing. On the
other hand, an older adult with multiple chronic
medical problems and no history of dizziness who
presents with a head laceration from a fall will
clearly need multiple resources: suturing, plus
blood/urine tests, ECG, and x-rays or consultations
with specialists. Accurate use of ESI triage is
contingent on the nurses' ability to predict resources
and as such is best performed by an experienced
emergency nurse. In general, we believe that no
matter what triage system is used, an experienced
emergency nurse is needed to safely perform triage.

Guidelines for the categorization of resources in the
ESI triage system are shown in Table 5-1 (repeat of
Table 3-1). ESI levels 3, 4, and 5 are differentiated by
the nurse's determination of how many resources
are needed to make a patient disposition. On the
basis of the triage nurse's predictions, patients who
are expected to consume no resources are classified
as level 5, those who are likely to require one
resource are level 4, and those who are expected to
need two or more resources are designated as ESI
level 3. Patients who need two or more resources
have been shown to have higher rates of hospital
admission and mortality and longer lengths of stay
in the ED (Eitel et al., 2003; Tanabe et al., 2004
Reliability and validity).

Though the list of resources in Table 5-1 is not
exhaustive, it provides general guidance on the
types of diagnostic tests, procedures, and therapeutic
treatments that constitute a resource in the ESI
system. Emergency nurses who use the ESI are
cautioned not to become overly concerned about
the definitions of individual resources. It is
important to remember that ESI requires the triage
nurse to merely estimate resources that the patient
will need while in the ED. The most common
resources are listed in Table 5-1; however a
comprehensive list of every possible ED resource is
neither practical nor necessary. In fact, all that is
really necessary for accurate ESI rating is to predict
whether the patient will need no resources, one, or
two or more resources. Once a triage nurse has
identified two probable resources, there is no need
to continue to estimate resources. The essence of the
ESI resource component is to separate more complex
(resource-intensive) patients from those with simpler
problems. The interventions considered as resources
for the purposes of ESI triage are those that indicate
a level of assessment or procedure beyond an exam
or brief interventions by ED staff and/or involve
personnel outside of the ED. Resources that require
significant ED staff time (such as intravenous
medication administration or chest tube insertion)
and those that require staff or resources outside the
ED (such as x-rays by the radiology staff or surgical
consults) increase the patient's ED length of stay and
indicate that the patient's complexity, and,
therefore, triage level is higher.

There are some common questions about what is
considered an ESI resource. First, there is often a
question about the number of blood or urine tests
and x-rays that constitute a resource. In the ESI
triage method, the triage nurse should count the
number of different types of resources needed to
determine the patient's disposition, not the number
of individual tests.

- A complete blood count (CBC) and electrolyte
panel comprise one resource (lab test).

- A CBC and chest x-ray are two resources (lab test,
x-ray).

- A CBC and a urinalysis are both lab tests and
together count as only one resource.

- A chest x-ray and plain skull films are one
resource (x-ray).

- A cervical-spine films and a computerized
tomography (CT) scan of the head are two
resources (x-ray and CT scan).

Another resource frequently questioned is the
application of a splint, which does not count as a
resource. If a splint did count, patients with sprained
ankles would be triaged as ESI level 3 (x-ray and
splint application). While the application of a splint
can certainly be resource intensive, it is important to
remember the only purpose of resource prediction is
to sort patients into distinct groups and help get the
right patient to the right area of the ED. In many
EDs, ESI level-3 patients are not appropriate for a
fast track or urgent care area. Triage scores are not a
measure of total nursing workload intensity.

Another common question about ESI resources
relates to the fact that eye irrigation is also
considered a resource. Patients with a chemical
splash usually meet ESI level-2 criteria because of the
high-risk nature of the splash, so eye irrigation is not
a key factor in their ESI rating. However, if the eye
problem was due to dust particles in the eye, the
patient would not necessarily be high risk. In this
type of patient, the eye irrigation would count as a
resource and the patient would meet ESI level-4
criteria. The eye exam does not count as a resource
because it is considered part of the physical exam.
Other common questions about resources are
addressed in the Chapter 5 Frequently Asked
Questions section of Appendix A.

Another frequent question posed by clinicians is
related to the items listed as “not resources” in Table
5-1. The purpose of the list is to assist triage nurses
with quick, accurate sorting of patients into five
clinically distinct levels (Wuerz, Milne, Eitel, Travers
& Gilboy, 2000). As such, items listed as not being
resources include physical exams, point-of-care tests,
and interventions that tend not to lead to increased
length of stay in the ED or indicate a higher level of
complexity. Since the standard of care is that all ED
patients undergo a basic history and physical exam,
an exam and even a pelvic exam does not constitute
a resource for ESI classification. The beauty of the
ESI is its simplicity; the true goal of the resource
determination is to differentiate the more
complicated patients needing two or more resources
(level 3 or above) from those with simpler problems
who are likely to need fewer than two resources
(level 4 or 5). Emergency nurses should not try to
complicate ESI by concentrating overly on resource
definitions. Usually, a patient requires either no
resources, one, or two or more resources.

Though resource consumption may vary by site,
provider, and even individual patient, triage nurses
are urged to make the ESI resource prediction by
thinking about the common approaches to the most
common presenting problems. Ideally, a patient
presenting to any emergency department should
consume the same general resources. For example, a
provider seeing an 82-year-old nursing home
resident who has an in-dwelling urinary catheter
and a chief complaint of fever and cough will most
likely order blood and urine tests and a chest x-ray.
The triage nurse can accurately predict that the
patient needs two or more resources and therefore
classify the patient as ESI level 3.

There may be minor variations in operations at
different EDs, but this will rarely affect the triage
rating. For example, some departments do
pregnancy tests in the ED (not a resource by ESI)
and others send them to the lab (a resource by ESI).
However, patients rarely have the pregnancy test as
their only resource, so most of those patients tend to
have two or more resources in addition to the
pregnancy test. One ED practice variation that may
result in different ESI levels for different sites is the
evaluation of patients with an isolated complaint of
sore throat. At some hospitals it is common practice
to obtain throat cultures (one resource, ESI level 4),
while at others it is not (no resources, ESI level 5).
Another example of different site practice variation
is the use of the Ottowa Ankle Rules. These are
validated rules used to determine the need for an xray of the ankle for patients that present with ankle
injuries. Institutional adoption of these rules into
practice varies. Institutions that use these rules at
triage may obtain fewer x-rays when compared with
institutions that do not routinely use these rules.

Temperature is an important assessment parameter
for determining the number of resources for very
young children. This subject will be covered in
Chapter 6.

From a clinical standpoint, ESI level 4 and 5 patients
can wait several hours to be seen by a provider.
However, from a customer service standpoint, these
patients are perhaps better served in a fast-track or
urgent care setting. Mid-level practitioners with the
appropriate skills mix and supervision could care for
level-4 and 5 patients. The ESI provides yet another
operational advantage, in that level-5 patients can
sometimes be “worked in” for a quick exam and
disposition by the provider, even if the department
is at capacity. Often triage policies clearly state ESI
level-4 or 5 patients can be triaged to an urgent care
or fast-track area.

In summary, the ESI provides an innovative
approach to ED triage with the inclusion of
predictions about the number of resources needed to
make a patient disposition. Consideration of
resources is included in the triage level assignment
for ESI level-3, 4, and 5 patients, while ESI level-1
and 2 decisions are based only on patient acuity.
Examples of ESI level-3, 4, and 5 patients are shown
in Table 5-2. Practical experience has demonstrated
that resource estimation is very beneficial in helping
sort the large number of patients with non-acute
presentations.

### Chapter 6.The Role of Vital Signs in ESI Triage

##### Introduction Figure 6-1. Danger Zone Vital Signs

In this chapter, we focus on decision point D—the
patient's vital signs. To reach this point in the ESI 
algorithm, the triage nurse has already determined 
that the patient does not meet ESI level-1 or 2 
criteria, and that he or she will require two or more 
resources. Since the patient requires two or more
resources, he or she meets the criteria for at least an 
ESI level 3. It is at this point in the algorithm that 
vital signs data are considered, so the triage nurse's
next step is to assess the patient's heart rate,
respiratory rate, and oxygen saturation, and, when
appropriate (for children under age 3), temperature.
If the danger zone vital sign limits are exceeded (as
illustrated in decision point D, Figure 6-1), the triage
nurse must strongly consider up-triaging the patient
from a level 3 to a level 2.

During the ESI triage educational program, a
considerable amount of time should be devoted to
exploring the importance of vital signs in the
decision to move a patient from ESI level 3 to an ESI
level 2. It should be stressed that it is always the
decision of the experienced triage nurse to determine
whether the patient meets criteria for ESI level 2,
based upon their past medical history, current
medications, and subjective and objective assessment
that includes general appearance. This decision is
based on the triage nurse's clinical judgment and
knowledge of normal vital sign parameters for all
ages and the influence of factors such as medications,
past medical history, and pain level.

##### What Are Vital Signs?

Vital signs traditionally include simple measurements
of physiological parameters including temperature,
blood pressure, pulse, and respiratory rate as well as
pulse oximetry (see Table 6-1). They frequently
prompt a health care worker to follow a particular
path of action. Recently, the nursing literature has
placed increased emphasis on pain. The American
Pain Society adopted the phrase “Pain: the fifth vital
sign” to increase healthcare workers' awareness of
the importance of assessment and management of
pain. Pain assessment is an important component of
ESI and is actually assessed earlier in the algorithm.
So, for the purpose of ESI, heart rate, respiratory rate,
oxygen saturation and temperature in children
under age 3 are the vital sign parameters considered
in decision point D. Vital signs represent a set of
objective data for use in determining general
parameters of patients' health and viability. The
values we obtain influence our interpretation of a
patient's overall condition and, therefore, the path
we take in establishing a diagnosis and treatment for
the patient. However, vital signs alone do not paint
a complete picture of the patient's condition. Vital
signs may be affected by a variety of factors
including prescription medications, herbals, and
recreational drugs. For example, beta-blockers cause
bradycardia and blunt the tachycardic response to
shock. Hypothyroidism, common in the elderly,
may lead to the finding of low temperature, even in
the face of sepsis. A young adult may have an
elevated body temperature due to recreational drug
use.

Vital signs are variable, dynamic indicators that are
an adjunct to a patient's evaluation. Vital sign
measurements may also be operator dependent, and
the definition of normal vital signs varies according
to the reference consulted. Even under the best
conditions, vital signs are not always reliable or
accurate (Edmonds, Mower, Lovato & Lomeli, 2002).
The patient's general appearance and clinical picture
frequently prove to be of the most value. However,
if in a triage nurse's judgment, knowing a patient's
vital signs would help with risk analysis, then vital
signs should be measured. For example, if the
patient is using immunosuppressive medications or
chemotherapy or is immunosuppressed by an illness
such as AIDS, then the body temperature should be
measured.

##### Are Vital Signs Necessary at Triage?

Prior to the advent of five-level triage in the United
States, tradition dictated that every patient
presenting to an emergency department should have
a set of vital signs taken before triage level
assignment. Vital signs were considered an integral
component of the initial nursing assessment and
were often used as a decisionmaking tool. In a
traditional three-level triage system, vital signs
helped determine how long a patient could wait for
treatment (i.e., if no abnormal vital signs were
present, in many cases, the patient could wait a
longer period of time). Vital signs, therefore, in the
past weighted heavily in the patient triage
assessment, with variable emphasis placed on the
clinical presentation.

More recently, newer triage models advocate
selective use of vital signs at triage (Gilboy, Travers &
Wuerz, 2000). Initial vital signs are not a mandatory
component of other five-level triage systems and in
general are not reported during the triage phase of a
level-1 or 2 patient (i.e., those patients with the
highest acuity). For example, the Guidelines for
_Implementation of the Australasian Triage Scale in_
_Emergency Departments states that “vital signs should_
only be measured at triage if required to estimate
urgency, or if time permits” (Australasian College for
Emergency Medicine, 2000). Similarly, the Canadian
Triage and Acuity Scale (CTAS) upholds the need for
vital signs if, and only if, they are necessary to
determine a triage level (in the cases of levels 3, 4,
and 5) as time permits (Beveridge et al., 2002. The
Manchester Triage Group uses specific vital sign
parameters as discriminators within a presentational
flow chart. The vital sign parameter is one of the
factors that help the triage nurse assign an acuity
level.

Vital signs may not always be the most appropriate
tool to determine triage acuity. At least one study
has suggested that vital signs are not always
necessary in the initial assessment of the patient at
triage. In 2002, Cooper, Flaherty, Lin, and Hubbell
examined the use of vital signs to determine a
patient's triage status. They considered age and
communication ability as factors. Twenty-four
different U.S. emergency departments and more
than 14,000 patients participated in that study. Final
results demonstrated that vital signs changed the
level of triage acuity status in only eight percent of
the cases. When further examining individual age
groups, pediatric patients age 2 or younger showed
the largest variation in triage decision with an 11.4
percent change once vital signs were collected.

##### Vital Signs and ESI Triage

Using ESI triage, the only absolute requirement for
vital signs assessment is for patients who don't
initially meet ESI level-1 or 2 criteria, but who are
predicted to need two or more resources. Assessment
of vital signs at triage is optional and at the
discretion of the triage nurse for patients triaged as
ESI level 1, 2, 4, or 5. While the ESI system does not
require vital signs assessment on all patients who
present to triage, local policies may dictate a
different procedure. Factors such as staffing levels,
casemix, and local resources influence individual
hospital policies regarding vital signs at triage and
are beyond the scope of this handbook. In general
when triaging a stable patient, it is never wrong to
obtain a set of vital signs. ESI requires vital signs for
only level-3 patients. (See Table 6-2)

The developers of the ESI and the current ESI
research team believe that experienced ED nurses
can use vital sign data as an adjunct to sound
clinical judgment when rating patients with the ESI.
There is limited evidence on vital sign abnormalities
as they relate to ED acuity and that are proven to
truly represent serious illness. The ESI has been
revised over time to reflect changes in the available
evidence and recommendations from the literature.
The ESI working group initially used the systemic
inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS) literature
(Rangel-Frausto et al., 1995) in developing the
danger zone vital sign box and accompanying
footnotes. The first version of the ESI used the SIRS
criteria to include a heart rate of greater than 90 (for
adults) as an absolute indicator to up-triage from ESI
level 3 to level 2 (Wuerz, Milne, Eitel, Traers &
Gilboy, 2000). The SIRS research was based on
predictors of mortality in an intensive care unit
population. Based on an excess of false positives
using these criteria for ED patients at the initial ESI
hospitals, the heart rate cutoff was changed to 100
in ESI version 2, and nurses were instructed to
consider up-triage to ESI 2 for adult patients with
heart rates greater than 100 (Wuerz et al., 2001;
Gilboy, Tanabe, Travers, Eitel & Wuerz, 2003).
Additionally, pediatric vital signs were added to the
danger zone vital signs box.

When using ESI as a triage system, vital signs
assessment is not necessary in the triage area for
patients who are immediately categorized as level 1
or 2. If the patient appears unstable or presents with
a chief complaint that necessitates immediate
treatment, then transport of the patient directly to
the treatment area should be expedited. For these
patients, the resuscitation team is responsible for
obtaining and monitoring vital signs at the bedside.
This would include patients that have clinical
appearances that indicate high risk or need for
immediate cardiovascular or respiratory
intervention. These patients may appear pale,
diaphoretic, or cyanotic. However, the triage nurse
has the option to perform vitals in the triage area, if
an open bed is not immediately available or if he or
she feels that the vital signs may assist in confirming
the triage acuity level. Some patients may not
initially be identified as ESI level 1 until vital signs
are taken. For example, an awake, alert elderly
patient who complains of dizziness might be found
to have a life-threatening condition when a heart
rate of 32 or 180 is discovered during vital sign
measurement.

As shown in the ESI algorithm in Chapter 3, if
patients do not meet ESI level-1 or 2 criteria, the
triage nurse comes to decision point C. The nurse
then determines how many resources the patient is
expected to need in the ED. If the patient is
expected to need one or no resources, he or she can
be assigned an ESI level of 4 or 5 and no vital sign
assessment is necessary. But if the patient is expected
to need two or more resources, then the nurse
comes to decision point D and vital signs should be
assessed. Vital signs can play a more important role
in the evaluation of some patients at triage,
especially those triaged as ESI level 3. The range of
vital signs may provide supporting data for potential
indicators of serious illness. If any of the danger
zone vital signs are exceeded, it is recommended
that the triage nurse consider up-triaging the patient
from level 3 to level 2.

Vital signs that are explicitly included in ESI triage
are heart rate, respiratory rate, and oxygen
saturation (for patients with potential respiratory
compromise). Temperature is specifically used in ESI
triage for children under age 3 (see below). It is
important to note that when considering abnormal
vital signs, blood pressure is not included in the ESI
algorithm. This does not mean that the triage nurse
should not take a blood pressure or a temperature
on older children or adults but that these vital signs
are not necessarily used to assist in selecting the
appropriate triage acuity level.

##### Vital Signs and Pediatric Fever

In this version of the ESI Handbook, version 4 (v.4)
of the ESI algorithm has been updated to include
more current pediatric fever criteria. As shown in
Figure 6-2, note D of the ESI algorithm addresses
pediatric fever considerations for ESI triage. This
section incorporates recommendations from the
American College of Emergency Physicians' Clinical
Policy for Children Younger Than Three Years
Presenting to the Emergency Department With Fever
(ACEP, 2003).

The ESI Triage Research Team recommends that vital
signs in patients under age 3 be assessed at triage. In
particular, temperature measurement is important
during triage of all children from newborn through
36 months of age, and vital sign evaluation is
essential to the overall assessment of a known febrile
infant under age 36 months (Baraff, 2000). This
helps to differentiate ESI level-2 and 3 patients and
minimize the risk that potentially bacteremic
children will be sent to an express care area or
otherwise experience an inappropriate wait.
Remember, if a patient is in immediate danger or
high risk, he or she will be assigned to either ESI
level 1 or 2.

Table 6-3 provides direction for the triage nurse in
using the ESI to assess the febrile child and
determine the most appropriate triage level. The
generally accepted definition of fever is a rectal
temperature greater than 38.0° C (100.4° F) (Baraff et
al., 1993; ACEP, 2003). The infant less than 28 days
old with a fever should be considered high risk and
assigned to at least ESI level 2. There are no clear
guidelines for the infant between 28 days and 3
months of age. The ESI research team recommends
triage nurses rely on local hospital guidelines. We
suggest that the nurse consider assigning at least an
ESI level 2 for such patients.

In v. 4 of the ESI, we have incorporated a different
set of pediatric fever guidelines for children ages 3 to
36 months. These pediatric fever considerations
pertain to highly febrile children, defined as those
with a fever of greater than 39.0° C (102.2° F) (ACEP,
2003). When triaging a child between 3 and 36
months of age who is highly febrile, it is important
for the triage nurse to assess the child's
immunization status and whether there is an
identifiable source for the fever. The patient with
incomplete immunizations or with no identifiable
source for the fever should be assigned to at least ESI
level 3. If the patient has an identifiable source for
the fever and his or her immunizations are up to
date, then a rating of 4 or 5 is appropriate. For
example, a 7-month-old who is followed by a
pediatrician, has had the Haemophilus influenza
type b (HIB) vaccine and presents with a fever and
pulling on his ear could be assigned to an ESI
level 5.

##### Case Examples

The following case studies are examples of how vital
signs data are used in ESI triage.

- “My doctor told me I am about 6 weeks pregnant
and now I think I am having a miscarriage,”
reports a healthy looking 28-year-old female. “I
started spotting this morning and now I am
cramping.” No allergies, no PMH, medications:
prenatal vitamins. Vital signs: T 98° F, HR 112, RR
22, BP 90/60.

This patient meets the criteria for being up-triaged
from a level 3 to a level 2 based on her vital signs.
Her increased heart rate, respiratory rate, and
decreased blood pressure are a concern. These factors
could indicate internal bleeding from a ruptured
ectopic pregnancy.

- “The baby has had diarrhea since yesterday. The
whole family has had that GI bug that is going
around,” reports the mother of a 15-month-old.
She tells you the baby has had a decreased
appetite, a low-grade temperature, and numerous
liquid stools. The baby is sitting quietly on the
mother's lap. The triage nurse notes signs of
dehydration. No PMH, NKDA, no medications.
Vital signs: T 100.4° F, HR 142, RR 48, BP 76/50.

This patient meets the criteria for at least ESI level 3.
For resources he would require labs and IV fluid.
Based on his vital signs the triage nurse can uptriage him to an ESI level 2. For a baby this age, both
heart rate and respiratory rate criteria are violated.

- “I need to see a doctor for my cough. I just can't
seem to shake it. Last night I didn't get much
sleep because I was coughing so much, I am just
so tired,” reports a 57-year-old female. She tells
you that she had a temperature of 101° last night
and that she is coughing up this yellow stuff. Her
history includes a hysterectomy 3 years ago; she
takes no medications but is allergic to Penicillin.
Vital signs: T 101.4°, RR 28, HR 100, SpO2 90
percent.

At the beginning of her triage assessment, this
patient sounds as though she could have
pneumonia. She will need two or more resources but
her low oxygen saturation and increased respiratory
rate are a concern. After looking at her vital signs
the triage nurse should up-triage the patient to an
ESI level 2.

- A 34-year-old obese female presents to triage
complaining of generalized abdominal pain (pain
scale rating: 6/10) for 2 days. She has vomited
several times and states her last bowel movement
was 3 days ago. She has a history of back surgery,
takes no medications, and is allergic to peanuts.
Vital signs: T 97.8° F, HR 104, RR 16, BP 132/80,
SpO2 99 percent.

This patient will need a minimum of two or more
resources: lab, IV fluids, perhaps IV medication for
nausea, and a CT scan. The triage nurse would
review the patient's vital signs and consider the
heart rate. The heart rate falls just outside the
accepted parameter for the age of the patient but
could be due to pain or exertion. In this case, the
decision should be to assign the patient to ESI
level 3.

- A tearful 9-year-old presents to triage with her
mother. She slipped on an icy sidewalk and
injured her right forearm. The forearm is
obviously deformed but has good color,
sensation, and movement. The mother reports
she has no allergies, takes no medications, and is
healthy. Vital signs: BP 100/68, HR 124, RR 32,
and SpO2 99 percent.

This child is experiencing pain from her fall and is
obviously upset. She will require at least two
resources: x-ray and orthopedic consult, and perhaps
conscious sedation. Her heart rate and respiratory
rate are elevated, but the triage nurse should feel
comfortable assigning this patient to ESI level 3. Her
vital sign changes are likely due to pain and distress.

- A 72-year-old patient presents to the ED with her
oxygen via nasal cannula for her advanced
COPD. She informs the triage nurse that she has
an infected cat bite on her left hand. The hand is
red, tender, and swollen. The patient has no
other medical problems, uses albuterol prn, and
takes an aspirin daily, NKDA. Vital signs: T 99.6°
F, HR 88, RR 22, BP 138/80, SpO2 91 percent. She
denies respiratory distress.

This patient will require two or more resources: labs
and IV antibiotics. She meets the criteria for ESI level
3. The triage nurse notices that her oxygen
saturation and respiratory rate are outside the
accepted parameters for the adult but this patient
has advanced COPD. These vital signs are not a
concern so the patient will not be up-triaged but
will stay an ESI level 3.

##### Case Examples

The following case studies are examples of how vital
signs data are used in ESI triage.

- “My doctor told me I am about 6 weeks pregnant
and now I think I am having a miscarriage,”
reports a healthy looking 28-year-old female. “I
started spotting this morning and now I am
cramping.” No allergies, no PMH, medications:
prenatal vitamins. Vital signs: T 98° F, HR 112, RR
22, BP 90/60.

This patient meets the criteria for being up-triaged
from a level 3 to a level 2 based on her vital signs.
Her increased heart rate, respiratory rate, and
decreased blood pressure are a concern. These factors
could indicate internal bleeding from a ruptured
ectopic pregnancy.

- “The baby has had diarrhea since yesterday. The
whole family has had that GI bug that is going
around,” reports the mother of a 15-month-old.
She tells you the baby has had a decreased
appetite, a low-grade temperature, and numerous
liquid stools. The baby is sitting quietly on the
mother's lap. The triage nurse notes signs of
dehydration. No PMH, NKDA, no medications.
Vital signs: T 100.4° F, HR 142, RR 48, BP 76/50.

This patient meets the criteria for at least ESI level 3.
For resources he would require labs and IV fluid.
Based on his vital signs the triage nurse can uptriage him to an ESI level 2. For a baby this age, both
heart rate and respiratory rate criteria are violated.

- “I need to see a doctor for my cough. I just can't
seem to shake it. Last night I didn't get much
sleep because I was coughing so much, I am just
so tired,” reports a 57-year-old female. She tells
you that she had a temperature of 101° last night
and that she is coughing up this yellow stuff. Her
history includes a hysterectomy 3 years ago; she
takes no medications but is allergic to Penicillin.
Vital signs: T 101.4°, RR 28, HR 100, SpO2 90
percent.

At the beginning of her triage assessment, this
patient sounds as though she could have
pneumonia. She will need two or more resources but
her low oxygen saturation and increased respiratory
rate are a concern. After looking at her vital signs
the triage nurse should up-triage the patient to an
ESI level 2.

- A 34-year-old obese female presents to triage
complaining of generalized abdominal pain (pain
scale rating: 6/10) for 2 days. She has vomited
several times and states her last bowel movement
was 3 days ago. She has a history of back surgery,
takes no medications, and is allergic to peanuts.
Vital signs: T 97.8° F, HR 104, RR 16, BP 132/80,
SpO2 99 percent.

This patient will need a minimum of two or more
resources: lab, IV fluids, perhaps IV medication for
nausea, and a CT scan. The triage nurse would
review the patient's vital signs and consider the
heart rate. The heart rate falls just outside the
accepted parameter for the age of the patient but
could be due to pain or exertion. In this case, the
decision should be to assign the patient to ESI
level 3.

- A tearful 9-year-old presents to triage with her
mother. She slipped on an icy sidewalk and
injured her right forearm. The forearm is
obviously deformed but has good color,
sensation, and movement. The mother reports
she has no allergies, takes no medications, and is
healthy. Vital signs: BP 100/68, HR 124, RR 32,
and SpO2 99 percent.

This child is experiencing pain from her fall and is
obviously upset. She will require at least two
resources: x-ray and orthopedic consult, and perhaps
conscious sedation. Her heart rate and respiratory
rate are elevated, but the triage nurse should feel
comfortable assigning this patient to ESI level 3. Her
vital sign changes are likely due to pain and distress.

- A 72-year-old patient presents to the ED with her
oxygen via nasal cannula for her advanced
COPD. She informs the triage nurse that she has
an infected cat bite on her left hand. The hand is
red, tender, and swollen. The patient has no
other medical problems, uses albuterol prn, and
takes an aspirin daily, NKDA. Vital signs: T 99.6°
F, HR 88, RR 22, BP 138/80, SpO2 91 percent. She
denies respiratory distress.

This patient will require two or more resources: labs
and IV antibiotics. She meets the criteria for ESI level
3. The triage nurse notices that her oxygen
saturation and respiratory rate are outside the
accepted parameters for the adult but this patient
has advanced COPD. These vital signs are not a
concern so the patient will not be up-triaged but
will stay an ESI level 3.

##### Conclusion

The information in this chapter provides a
foundation for understanding the role of vital signs
in the Emergency Severity Index triage system. We
addressed the special case of patients under 36
months of age. Further research is necessary to
clarify the best vital sign thresholds used in
emergency department triage. Further study will also
examine pediatric populations presenting to the
emergency department. It is our hope that future
versions of the ESI will be based on additional
evidence regarding the predictive value of triage
vital signs for pediatric and adult patients.

### Appendix A. Frequently Asked Questions

##### Chapter 3.

###### Frequently Asked Questions

1. Do I have to upgrade the adult patient’s triage
level if the heart rate is greater than 100?

No, it is a factor to consider.

2. Do I have to upgrade the patient’s triage level if
the pain rating is 7/10 or greater?

No, again this is one factor to consider.

3. If the patient is chronically confused, should the
patient then automatically be categorized as ESI
level 2?

No, an ESI level 2 is assigned to patients with an
acute change in level of consciousness.

4. When do I need to measure vital signs?

For any patient who meets ESI level-3 criteria.
Vital signs are always obtained if the triage nurse
determines they may be useful.

##### Chapter 4.

###### Frequently Asked Questions

1. Do I have to assign the ESI triage category of 2
for the 25-year-old female patient who rates her
pain as 10/10 and is eating potato chips?

No. With stable vital signs and no other factors
that would meet high-risk criteria, this patient
should be assigned ESI level 3. She will most
likely need labs, and either x-rays, an IV, or pain
medications, i.e., two or more resources. You
would not use your last open bed for her.

2. Does an 80-year-old female who is chronically
confused need to be triaged as ESI level 2?

No. The new onset of confusion, lethargy, or
disorientation meet criteria for ESI level 2.

3. Shouldn’t the patient with active chest pain be
rated an ESI level 1? After all, they should be the
highest priority.

Not all patients with chest pain meet ESI level-1
criteria. If they are unresponsive, pulseless, apneic
or not breathing, or require immediate life saving
intervention, they meet level-1 criteria. A chest
pain patient that is pale, diaphoretic,
hypotensive, or bradycardic will require
immediate IV access to improve their
hemodynamic status is level 1. Stable patients
with active chest pain usually meet high-risk
criteria and should be categorized ESI level 2;
immediate placement should be facilitated.

##### Chapter 5.

###### Frequently Asked Questions

1. Why isn’t crutch-walking instruction a resource?

Though crutch-walking instruction may consume
a fair amount of the ED staff members’ time, it is
often provided to patients who have simple ankle
sprains. These patients are typically classified as
ESI level 4 (ankle x-ray = one resource). The
patients are clearly less acute and less resource
intensive than more complex patients like those
with tibia/fibula fractures who are usually ESI
level 3 (leg films, orthopedic consult, cast/splint,
IV pain medications = two or more resources). A
better way to reflect the ED staff’s efforts for
crutch-walking instruction is with a nursing
resource intensity measure.

2. Why isn’t a splint a resource?

The application of simple, pre-formed splints
(such as splints for ankle sprains) is not
considered a resource. In contrast, the creation
and application of splints by ED staff, such as
thumb spica splints for thumb fractures, does
constitute a resource. A helpful way to
differentiate patients with extremity trauma is as
follows: patients with likely fractures should be
rated ESI 3 (two or more resources: x-ray, pain
medications, creation and application of
splints/casts), whereas patients more likely to
have simple sprains can be rated as ESI level 4.

3. Why isn’t a saline or heparin lock a resource?

Generally speaking, insertion of a heparin lock
doesn’t consume a large amount of ED staff time.
However, many patients who have heparin locks
inserted also have at least two other resources
(e.g., laboratory tests, intravenous medications)
and are therefore classified as ESI level 3 anyway.

4. Are all conscious sedation patients ESI level 3 or
higher?

Yes, conscious sedation is considered a complex
procedure (two resources) and is generally
performed with patients who also have
laboratory tests or x-rays, and other procedures
such as fracture reduction or dilation and
curettage.

5. Which of the following are considered resources:
eye irrigation, nebulized medication
administration, and blood transfusions?

All three are considered resources for the
purposes of ESI triage ratings. The resources tend
to be used for more acute patients, require
significant ED staff time, and likely lead to longer
length of stay for patients.

6. Are all asthmatics ESI level 4 because they will
require a nebulized medication?

No. Stable asthmatics who only require a
nebulized medications are assigned ESI level 4.
However, some asthmatics are in severe
respiratory distress and meet ESI level-2 criteria.
Others are somewhere in between and will
require intravenous steroids or an x-ray in
addition to nebulized treatments and would be
assigned ESI level 3. Finally, asthmatics who
require only a prescription refill of their inhaler
are assigned ESI level 5. They do not require any
resources.

##### Chapter 6.

###### Frequently Asked Questions

1. Why aren’t vital signs required to triage ESI level1 and 2 patients?

Vital signs are not necessary to rate patients as
life threatening (ESI level 1) or high-risk (ESI level
2). Since ESI level 1 and 2 patients are critical,
they require the medical team to respond
quickly. Simultaneous actions can occur and vital
signs can be collected as part of the initial
assessment in the main acute area of the
emergency department.

2. Why aren’t vital signs required for ESI level-4 and
5 patients?

Vital signs are not necessary to rate patients as
low or no resource (ESI level 4 or 5). Also, the
pain, anxiety, and discomfort associated with an
emergency department visit often alter a patient’s
vital signs. Vital signs may quickly return to
normal once the initial assessment is addressed.
However, a nurse may choose to assess vital signs
if signs of deranged symptoms exist (e.g., changes
in skin color, mentation, dizziness, sweating). If
there is no physical sign indicating a need for
vital signs, the patient can be taken in the main
emergency department or express care room.

3. Why are vital signs done on ESI level-3 patients?

Vital signs can aid in differentiating patients
needing multiple resources as either stable (ESI
level 3) or potentially unstable or high-risk (ESI
level 2). On occasion, ESI level-3 patients may
actually have unstable vital signs while appearing
stable. Vital signs for ESI level-3 patients provide
a safety check. In general, ESI level-3 patients are
more complicated and many are admitted to the
hospital. Since these patients are not appropriate
for the fast-track area, they are sometimes asked
to wait for more definitive care. These patients
present a unique challenge to the triaging process
and caregivers find it necessary to rely on vital
signs to confirm that an appropriate ESI level has
been assigned.

4. Why are temperatures always done for pediatric
patients less than 36 months?

Temperature is useful in differentiating pediatric
patients that are low or no resource (ESI level 4 or
5) from those that will consume multiple
resources. An abnormal temperature in the less
than 3 month old may indicate bacteremia, and
place the child in a high-risk category.

5. Why does the literature present conflicting
information on the value of vital signs during the
triage process?

There is no definitive research on the utility of
vital signs for emergency department triage.
Many factors influence the accuracy of vital sign
data. Vital signs are a somewhat operatordependent component of a patient’s assessment.
In some cases, vital signs may be affected by
many factors such as chronic drug therapy (e.g.,
beta-blockers). Vital signs may also be used to
fulfill part of the public health obligation
assumed by emergency departments. And, lastly,
vital signs help segment young pediatric patients
into various categories.

6. Does JCAHO require vital signs to be done during
triage?

The Joint Commission on Accreditation of
Healthcare Organizations does not specifically
state a standard for vital signs. The organization
does assert that physiologic parameters should be
assessed as determined by patient condition.

7. Should vital sign criteria be strict in the danger
zone vital sign box?

In common usage, when the danger zone vital
sign criteria are exceeded, up-triage is
“considered” rather than automatic. The
experienced triage nurse is called upon to use
good clinical judgment in rating the patient’s ESI
level. The nurse incorporates information about
the vital signs, history, medications, and clinical
presentation of the patient in that decisionmaking process. Research is still needed to
determine the predictive value of vital signs at
triage, and to determine absolute cutoffs for uptriage.

8. What if ESI level-4 or 5 patients have danger
zone vital signs?

Though it is not required to take vital signs in
order to assign ESI 4 or 5 levels, many patients
may have vitals assessed at triage if that is part of
the particular ED’s operational process. Per the
ESI triage algorithm, the triage nurse does not
have to take the vital signs into account in
determining that the patient meets ESI level-5
(no resources) or ESI level-4 (one resource)
criteria. However, in practice, the prudent nurse
will use good clinical judgment and take the vital
sign information into account in rating the ESI
level. If the patient requests only a prescription
refill and has no acute complaints, but has a
heart rate of 104 after walking up the hill to the
ED, the nurse might still rate the patient as an
ESI level 5. But if the patient requests a
prescription refill and has a heart rate of 148 and
irregular, the nurse should rate the patient as ESI
level 2. The triage nurse must also consider the
following dilemma: an elevated blood pressure in
an ESI level-4 or 5 patient. If the patient is
asymptomatic related to the blood pressure, the
triage level should not change. Most likely, an
elevated BP in the asymptomatic patient will not
be treated in the ED. However, it may be
important to refer the patient to a primary care
physician for BP follow-up and long term
diagnosis and treatment.

# Emergency Severity Index, Version 4: Implementation Handbook

### Note from the Director

The Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality is proud to present the Emergency Severity Index, Version 4: Implementation Handbook. This guide details every aspect of the Emergency Severity Index (ESI), a five-level triage system used in emergency departments to categorize patients into five groups—ranging from 1 (most urgent) to 5 (least urgent)—based on the severity of their condition and the resources they require.

Following the creation of the ESI by emergency physicians Richard Wuerz and David Eitel in 1998 and successful pilot testing, the ESI Triage Group was established. Additional development of the ESI was supported by a grant from AHRQ. This group, made up of clinicians, managers, educators, and researchers, continued to improve the algorithm into its current form.

Aligned with our mission to enhance the quality, safety, efficiency, and effectiveness of health care for all Americans, AHRQ places a strong focus on training. This handbook, together with the included two DVDs, offers essential support to emergency department nurses, physicians, and administrators in establishing a thorough ESI educational program. The resources are based on ESI Version 4, which features updates to the algorithm, particularly expanding the criteria for ESI level 1 and refining the guidelines for pediatric fever.

An effectively executed ESI program enables hospital emergency departments to quickly recognize patients requiring urgent care, more accurately identify those who can be safely and efficiently treated in a fast-track or urgent care setting instead of the main ED, and more precisely establish criteria for diverting ambulance patients away from the ED.

We hope this tool proves helpful as you continue working to enhance the quality of care in your emergency department.

### Chapter 2.Triage Acuity Systems

##### Standardization of Triage Acuity

Despite the fact that U.S. emergency departments (EDs) receive over 110 million visits annually (McCaig & Burt, 2004), there is a lack of comprehensive data on these visits at the local, regional, or national scale. This scarcity of information makes it challenging to address key questions such as “Which EDs treat the most critically ill patients?” and “What impact does patient acuity have on ED overcrowding?” As a result, there is increasing interest in developing standardized ED data systems in the United States to enhance clinical care, facilitate ED monitoring, enable benchmarking, and support research efforts (Barthell, Coonan, Finnell, Pollock, & Cochrane, 2004; Gilboy, Travers & Wuerz, 1999; Handler et al., 2004; National Center for Injury Prevention and Control).

A key data point in the emergency department is triage acuity, described by the Data Elements for Emergency Department Systems Task Force as the categorization of a patient’s condition based on how life- or limb-threatening it is, and whether urgent intervention is required to relieve symptoms (NCIPC, 1997, p. 94).

There is significant inconsistency among emergency department triage acuity systems, especially within the United States (Emergency Nurses Association [ENA], 1997). Different systems use varying terminology for triage categories, and there is no universal consensus on the definitions for each level. Table 2-1 provides examples of acuity rating systems. Due to the absence of standardized triage acuity data in the U.S., it is understandable that the emergency department has been referred to as a “black box” of crucial public health information that remains mostly inaccessible in its current state (Martinez, 1995).

The Emergency Severity Index (ESI) is an innovative tool for assessing triage acuity in emergency departments. Research has demonstrated its consistency across various ED environments, including both urban and rural areas as well as academic and community hospitals (Eitel, Travers, Rosenau, Gilboy & Wuerz, 2003). With widespread adoption in U.S. emergency departments, the ESI could serve as a standard method for triage acuity assessment. This chapter outlines the traditional triage systems used in U.S. EDs and reviews the research related to those systems. It then provides a brief overview of recent triage approaches developed in Australia, Canada, and the United Kingdom. The chapter ends with an examination of studies on the new ESI triage system and explores its potential advantages.

##### Triage Systems in the United States

Although numerous hospitals in the United States continue to utilize three- or four-level triage systems, there is a movement toward adopting five-level systems. The National Center for Health Statistics intends to substitute four-level triage data with five-level data in upcoming national benchmarking surveys of U.S. emergency departments. This change is driven by increasing evidence that five-level triage acuity data are more reliable and valid compared to three-level systems (personal communication, Linda McCaig, National Center for Health Statistics, October 6, 2004).

Both the ENA and the American College of Emergency Physicians (ACEP) have expressed their support for five-level triage systems in U.S. emergency departments. In 2003, a joint task force from ENA and ACEP was formed to review the evidence regarding five-level triage systems, and their work is still in progress. That same year, ACEP and ENA released a joint statement:

ACEP and ENA believe that patient care quality would improve by introducing a standardized triage scale and acuity classification system in emergency departments. Drawing on expert consensus and current evidence, ACEP and ENA endorse the use of a dependable, validated five-level triage scale (ACEP, 2003; ENA, 2003).

A 2005 task force paper recommended both the ESI and the Canadian Triage and Acuity Scale (CTAS) as reliable and valid triage methods (Fernandes et al., 2005). With increasing evidence favoring five-level triage systems, it is probable that a greater number of U.S. hospitals have adopted some version of this approach. The ENA intends to gather information on the types of triage systems used in U.S. hospitals in their next emergency department survey.

##### Research on Triage Systems in the United States

Research on triage acuity systems is increasing, with a primary focus on two important aspects of triage nurses’ acuity ratings: reliability and validity (Pedhazur & Schmelkin, 1991; Waltz, Strickland & Lenz, 1991). Reliability refers to the consistency or level of agreement among individuals using a particular rating system. In the context of emergency department (ED) triage acuity ratings, there are two relevant types of reliability. Interrater reliability assesses whether two different nurses would assign the same triage acuity level to the same patient, while intrarater reliability examines if the same nurse would give the same rating to the same patient at different times. Multiple studies in the United States have found that traditional three-level triage systems often show low interrater and intrarater reliability (Gill, Reese & Diamond, 1996; Travers, Waller, Bowling, Flowers & Tintinalli, 2002; Wuerz, Fernandes & Alarcon, 1998). In one such study, 305 triage assessments were analyzed after all triage nurses completed a required refresher course on the hospital’s three-level triage system (Travers et al., 2002). The initial ratings by the triage nurses were compared to retrospective ratings made by an expert panel of ED triage nurses, and the two groups agreed in about half of the cases.

Validity refers to how accurately the rating system measures what it is supposed to measure. In the context of acuity ratings, validity indicates whether a label such as “nonurgent” truly reflects the absence of urgency in an emergency department patient’s condition. Assessing the validity of triage acuity has been challenging, and research studies have not reported on it.

In contrast to urine culture—which serves as the gold standard for accurately diagnosing urinary tract infections—there is no definitive gold standard for assessing the accuracy of triage acuity ratings in the conventional three-level triage system used in the United States. Instead, surrogate indicators such as admission rates, resource use, and six-month mortality have been employed to evaluate the effectiveness of five-level triage systems.

##### Triage Acuity Research on Five- Level Systems Abroad

Highly reliable and well-established five-level triage systems are now standard practice in various countries. Table 2-2 outlines three of these systems.

The Australasian Triage Scale (ATS), created in Australia, has been implemented across Australia and New Zealand since the early 1990s (Australasian College for Emergency Medicine, 1994, 2002; Cameron, Bradt & Ashby, 1996). The Australian Council on Healthcare Standards uses the ATS as the foundation for emergency department (ED) evaluation and quality assurance, with triage classifications regularly reviewed. Australian EDs are required to manage patients according to guidelines determined by their triage level. For instance, emergency cases must be attended to within 10 minutes, while nonurgent cases should be seen within 2 hours.

Several studies have assessed the validity and reliability of the ATS. Since there is no definitive gold standard for evaluating triage acuity, researchers have compared the five-level system to other illness severity scales and patient outcomes (Cameron et al., 1996; Cleary, Ashby, Jelinek & Lagaida, 1994; Erwich, Bond, Phillips, & Baggoley, 1997). Triage categories have shown strong correlations with disease- and population-specific measures, such as the Injury Severity Scales, trauma scores, and scales for cardiac, asthma, and pediatric patients. The ATS has also demonstrated a strong relationship with resource use and outcome indicators, including admission rates, emergency department length of stay, and mortality. Additionally, studies in which triage nurses assigned acuity levels to case scenarios have found that the ATS exhibits fair to moderate interrater reliability (Dilley & Standen, 1998; Jelinek & Little, 1996).

Five-level triage systems have been adopted in both the United Kingdom (U.K.) and Canada. In the U.K., the Manchester Triage Scale is utilized.

The system, developed in the U.K., uses a flow-chart presentation style (Manchester Triage Group, 1997). Nurses begin by determining the patient's main complaint, then select one of 52 flow charts to guide a structured interview and assign a triage category ranging from 1 (requiring immediate attention) to 5 (care needed within four hours). The Accident and Emergency Nurses Association has endorsed this system (Zimmermann, 2001). However, research on the Manchester system is limited. In one reliability study, triage assessments by nurses were retrospectively compared to those of senior medical staff, with only fair to moderate agreement found (Goodacre, Gillett, Harris & Houlihan, 1999).

The Canadian Triage and Acuity Scale (CTAS) was created by a team of Canadian emergency physicians (Beveridge & Ducharme, 1997; Canadian Association for Emergency Physicians [CAEP], 2002). Both the National Emergency Nurses' Affiliation, Inc. (NENA) and the Canadian Association for Emergency Physicians (CAEP) have recognized CTAS as the national benchmark for emergency department triage. Canadian hospitals are mandated to report data, including CTAS scores, for all emergency department visits to the Canadian government. Research has also demonstrated that the Canadian five-level scale provides strong interrater reliability when clinicians assess the severity of written scenarios based on real patient cases.

##### History of the Emergency Severity Index (ESI)

The Emergency Severity Index (ESI) is a five-level triage system created by emergency department physicians Richard Wuerz and David Eitel in the United States (Gilboy et al., 1999; Wuerz, Milne, Eitel, Travers & Gilboy, 2000). The creators believed that a key function of an emergency department triage tool is to help prioritize patients according to the urgency of their conditions. Triage nurses assess priority by asking, “Who should be seen first?” However, Drs. Wuerz and Eitel recognized that when several high-priority patients arrive at the same time, the question shifts to, “How long can each patient wait?” The ESI was designed based on a new approach to ED triage. Beyond determining which patient needs immediate attention, the ESI also guides triage nurses in considering what resources are required to move each patient toward an ED outcome. While the ESI maintains the traditional focus on patient urgency, it also aims to achieve a second objective: not only sorting patients but also directing them to the appropriate resources, ensuring the right patient receives the right care at the right time and place.

The initial version (v. 1) of the ESI was first used at two university-affiliated emergency departments in the spring of 1999. By fall 2000, the ESI was updated with input from emergency department clinicians to add triage criteria for pediatric patients, and this second version (v. 2) was then introduced in five more hospitals, including both non-university teaching and community hospitals. Drawing on feedback from nurses and physicians at these locations, as well as the best scientific evidence available, the ESI was further improved and released as version 3 (v. 3) in 2001 (Wuerz et al., 2001). More recently, additional updates have been made to the tool, which is presented in this edition of the ESI handbook as version 4 (v. 4) (Tanabe et al., in press).

Emergency physicians and nurses in the United States and Canada have carried out multiple research studies evaluating the reliability and validity of the ESI. The ESI has been directly compared with traditional three-level triage systems as well as the five-level CTAS. These studies will be discussed later in the chapter. Similar to the Australasian, Canadian, and U.K. systems, the ESI triage system consists of five levels. However, it differs in both its conceptual framework and practical use. The triage systems from Australia, Canada, and the U.K. are based on the idea that triage is meant to determine how long a patient can safely wait for care in the emergency department, with specific definitions for the time to physician assessment included in their protocols. This is a key distinction between ESI and both CTAS and the ATS, as ESI does not specify expected time frames for physician evaluation.

The ESI stands out because it requires the triage nurse to predict the resources a patient will need—such as diagnostic tests and procedures—in addition to assessing acuity, in order to assign a triage category for patients who are less critically ill. Figure 2-1 presents the ESI triage levels. Later chapters will explain in detail how to use the ESI to categorize emergency department patients. In summary, the process begins with evaluating acuity by considering the stability of the patient’s vital signs and the risk of an immediate threat to life or organs. For patients who are stable, the nurse then estimates the resources likely needed to reach a disposition in the emergency department, based on their professional judgment. These resource requirements can vary from none to two or more.

##### Research on the Emergency Severity Index

In a preliminary study evaluating ESI v.1 ratings for 493 triage cases at two Boston hospitals in 1998, researchers determined that the system was both valid and reliable (Wuerz et al., 2000). During the study, patients were triaged at the same time by the triage nurse using the standard three-level scale and by a research nurse applying the first version of the ESI. Afterwards, an investigator, who was unaware of the research nurse’s ESI rating, reassessed the patients using only the written triage notes and the ESI. The triage levels showed a strong correlation with the resources utilized in the emergency department and with outcomes like hospital admission. Patients with higher acuity (ESI levels 1 and 2) required more resources and had a greater likelihood of being admitted compared to those with lower acuity (ESI levels 4 and 5). The agreement between the research nurse and the investigator was high, with 77 percent matching exactly and 22 percent differing by only one triage level.

Several studies have assessed the reliability of the ESI by using the kappa statistic to determine inter-rater agreement, where kappa values range from 0 (no agreement) to 1 (perfect agreement). At one of the original ESI sites, a time series design was employed to compare triage reliability using a three-level scale before and after the introduction of ESI v.1 (Travers et al., 2002). The reliability improved, with the weighted kappa increasing from 0.53 for the three-level system to 0.68 for the five-level ESI. Another study investigated the reliability and validity of ESI v.2 during and after its implementation in triage at seven hospitals in the northeast and southeast. Over 200 triage nurses participated in an ESI triage education program, where they rated 40 case studies using the ESI (Eitel et al., 2003). The findings showed substantial inter-rater reliability, with kappa values between 0.70 and 0.80. Additionally, 386 actual patient triage decisions were analyzed, revealing high inter-rater reliability with weighted kappas from 0.69 to 0.87. In a separate study conducted at an urban emergency department in the Midwest, researchers assessed the reliability of ESI v.3 for 403 real patient triages and found a kappa of 0.89 (Tanabe, Gimbel, Yarnold, Kyriacou & Adams, 2004).

Researchers from Canada and the United States have directly compared the inter-rater reliability of the ESI and CTAS in a randomized study (Worster et al., 2004). The study involved ten Canadian triage nurses who were experienced with CTAS. These nurses were randomly assigned to receive either ESI version 3 or CTAS refresher training, after which they evaluated 200 case studies using either the ESI or CTAS. Both groups demonstrated excellent inter-rater reliability, with kappa values of 0.89 for ESI and 0.91 for CTAS.

The effectiveness of the ESI has been assessed by analyzing outcomes in several thousand patients. Research has demonstrated consistent and strong associations between the ESI and factors such as hospitalization, emergency department length of stay, and mortality (Eitel et al., 2003; Tanabe et al., 2004; Wuerz, 2001; Wuerz et al., 2001). Additionally, the ESI has shown moderate correlations with physician evaluation and management codes, as well as nursing workload indicators (Travers et al., 2002). The ESI also enables meaningful comparisons of patient case mix across different hospitals. In one study, a stratified random sample of 200 patients was taken from each of the seven original ESI hospitals to compare case mix (Eitel et al., 2003). As anticipated, tertiary care centers had a greater proportion of high-acuity patients, while community hospitals had more patients requiring fewer resources.

A survey conducted among nursing staff at the two initial university teaching hospitals found that the response to the ESI implementation was favorable (Wuerz et al., 2001). Nurses indicated that the ESI was simpler to use and more effective for prioritizing patients for care compared to the previous three-level systems used at both locations.

In the latest ESI study, the accuracy of ESI level 2 was closely analyzed (Tanabe et al., in press). Among 571 patients categorized as ESI level 2 across five hospitals, 20 percent required immediate, life-saving treatment. The researchers suggested that these patients should be reclassified as ESI level 1. The revised ESI version 4, discussed in subsequent chapters of this book, incorporates changes informed by this recent research.

##### Benefits of the Emergency Severity Index

The ESI has been adopted by hospitals across various regions, including both university and community hospitals, as well as teaching and nonteaching facilities. Clinicians, managers, and researchers in these settings have recognized several advantages of ESI triage compared to traditional three-level systems. One key advantage is the ability to quickly identify patients who require immediate care. ESI triage emphasizes the efficient sorting of patients, especially when resources are limited. In some ways, it returns to the original intent of triage as established during Napoleon’s era. ESI sorts patients into five categories, each with significant differences in anticipated resource needs and corresponding operational requirements. This rapid categorization can enhance patient flow through the emergency department. After an ESI level is determined, patients can be directed to further assessment, registration, initial treatment, or the waiting area, depending on their severity and expected resource use. For instance, patients classified as level 1 or 2 are taken straight to the treatment area for prompt evaluation and care, while those at levels 4 and 5 proceed to registration and then wait for an available bed.

A key concern separate from ESI triage is when to perform a full nursing assessment. Many experts agree that a comprehensive assessment does not need to take place at the initial triage station; instead, it can be completed in the main treatment area or a secondary triage area, depending on each patient’s needs and the current workload in the emergency department (Gilboy et al., 1999). At triage, only the evaluation necessary to assign an ESI level is required to help with the initial sorting of patients. Full clinical assessments are time-consuming, and conducting them at triage can delay care and lower satisfaction for patients with less severe conditions. As patient numbers and case complexity rise, leading to ED overcrowding, it is necessary to rethink traditional care processes to improve efficiency and effectiveness. Nevertheless, it remains essential to gather enough information to accurately determine the appropriate triage category. This is particularly important when patients face long waits to see a physician, which is common with higher patient volumes. Triage has become even more vital as waiting room times increase. Assigning a patient to an inappropriately low triage category can heighten the risk of poor outcomes due to the resulting extended wait.

Additional advantages of the ESI include its ability to identify patients who do not require care in the main emergency department and can instead be safely and more efficiently managed in a fast-track or urgent care setting. For instance, in many hospitals, triage guidelines specify that all ESI level 4 and 5 patients may be directed to either medical urgent care or minor trauma sections of the ED. The policy also permits certain level-3 patients, such as those needing straightforward migraine treatment, to be sent to urgent care (UC). ESI level-3 patients assigned to UC, as well as any patients transferred from UC to the acute area for more serious issues, are tracked through the quality improvement program. Nurses using the ESI have noted that it improves communication about patient acuity compared to the previous three-level triage systems used at these facilities (Wuerz et al., 2001). For example, a triage nurse can say to the charge nurse, “I need a bed for a level 2 patient,” and this shared terminology allows the charge nurse to immediately understand the situation without requiring a detailed patient description.

The ESI has also served as the basis for emergency department policies targeting certain groups. For instance, at one location, the psychiatric team is required to provide consultations for level 2 and 3 patients within 30 minutes, and for level 4 and 5 patients within an hour of being notified. At another facility, the ESI is part of a policy for patients over 20 weeks pregnant who come to the ED. Patients assigned ESI levels 1 and 2 receive care in the ED by emergency medicine staff with an obstetric consultation, while those at levels 3, 4, or 5 are directed to the hospital’s labor and delivery unit.

The ESI is also an effective method for setting thresholds to divert ambulance patients away from the ED. At Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston, the ED Diversion Policy and Guidelines define full capacity as all RN-staffed ED beds being occupied. The ESI is utilized to assess when the department is over capacity.

Studies have demonstrated that the ESI is a dependable and accurate method for assessing triage acuity. This system has been implemented in numerous emergency departments across various regions of the United States, including both academic and community hospitals. These institutions have shown that using the ESI enhances emergency department efficiency and patient outcomes. Broader use of the ESI in U.S. hospitals could help create a standardized approach to triage acuity assessment, supporting benchmarking, public health monitoring, and research efforts.

### Chapter 3. Introduction to the Emergency Severity Index

The Emergency Severity Index (ESI) is an easy-to-use, five-level triage tool that classifies emergency department patients by assessing both the severity of their condition and the resources they will require. The triage nurse first evaluates the patient’s acuity. If the patient does not qualify for the highest acuity levels (ESI level 1 or 2), the nurse then considers the anticipated resource needs to assign a triage level (ESI level 3, 4, or 5). Unlike other triage systems, the ESI uniquely incorporates resource requirements into its assessment. Acuity is judged based on the stability of vital signs and the risk to life, limb, or organ function. The nurse predicts resource needs by drawing on experience with patients who have had similar symptoms or injuries. Resource needs refer to the number of interventions or services a patient is likely to need before a decision about their care can be made. After becoming familiar with the ESI algorithm, the triage nurse can quickly and accurately assign patients to one of five clearly defined, non-overlapping categories. The ESI offers emergency departments a reliable and valid method for triage (Eitel, Travers, Rosenau, Gilboy & Wuerz, 2003; Travers, Waller, Bowling, Flowers & Tintinalli, 2002; Wuerz, Travers, Gilboy, Eitel, Rosenau & Yazhari, 2001; Tanabe, Gimbel, Yarnold, Kyriacou, & Adams, 2004; Tanabe, Gimbel, Yarnold, & Adams, 2004).

This chapter offers a detailed, step-by-step guide to triaging using the ESI algorithm. Later chapters delve deeper into essential concepts and include various examples to illustrate the nuances of applying ESI.

Algorithms are commonly applied in emergency care settings. Many emergency clinicians are well-acquainted with the algorithms taught in programs like Basic Life Support, Advanced Cardiac Life Support, and the Trauma Nursing Core Course. These programs offer a systematic, stepwise method for clinical decision making that clinicians can master through repeated practice. At each stage of the algorithm, users are guided on which questions to pose or what information to collect. Depending on the responses or data gathered, a decision is reached, and the algorithm leads the user to the subsequent step, eventually resulting in an outcome.

Using the ESI algorithm for triage requires an experienced emergency department nurse to begin at the top of the algorithm. Figure 3-1 provides a conceptual summary of the ESI algorithm, highlighting its key decision points. A more detailed explanation of the actual ESI algorithm is given later in the chapter (see Figure 3-1a). The algorithm involves four decision points (A, B, C, and D) to categorize patients into one of five triage levels (refer to Figure 3-1). With experience, the triage nurse will be able to quickly progress through each ESI decision point.

##### Decision Point A: Is the Patient Dying?

In simple terms, at decision point A (Figure 3-2), the triage nurse determines whether the patient is dying. If the response is “yes,” the triage process ends, and the patient is immediately assigned to ESI level 1. If the answer is “no,” the process continues to the next step in the algorithm, decision point B.

This question helps assess if the patient is at risk of imminent death (conceptual algorithm): Does the patient need urgent life-saving measures? The questions below assist in evaluating whether the patient fulfills level-1 criteria:

Does the patient need urgent airway management, medication, or another hemodynamic intervention?

Does the patient exhibit any of the following: is already intubated, not breathing, without a pulse, experiencing severe respiratory distress, has an SpO2 below 90 percent, shows sudden changes in mental status, or is unresponsive?

Studies have shown that triage nurses can reliably anticipate when immediate interventions are necessary (Tanabe et al., in press). For ESI triage, Table 3-1 outlines which interventions are classified as life-saving and which are not.

Interventions that are not classified as life-saving may involve diagnostic or therapeutic procedures, but do not directly “save a life.” Life-saving interventions focus on ensuring an open airway, sustaining breathing, or supporting circulation. The following questions may assist in assessing whether a patient needs a life-saving intervention.

Is this patient's airway open and unobstructed?

Is the patient showing signs of breathing?

Is the patient exhibiting a pulse?

Is the nurse worried about the pulse’s rate, rhythm, and strength?

Was this patient intubated before arriving at the hospital due to worries about their capacity to keep their airway open, breathe on their own, or sustain adequate oxygen levels?

Is the nurse worried about whether this patient can supply enough oxygen to their tissues?

An ESI level-1 patient arrives at the emergency department in a critical, unstable state. Immediate intervention is essential to prevent death, prompting a coordinated team response with the physician present at the bedside and nurses delivering intensive care. These patients receive immediate attention, as prompt treatment can influence their risk of complications or death.

A primary distinction between ESI level-1 and level-2 patients is the necessity for immediate physician involvement in patient care. Level-1 patients are in critical condition and need prompt evaluation and intervention by a physician. In contrast, although level-2 patients are also seriously ill, emergency nurses can begin treatment using established protocols without a physician present. The nurse understands that interventions are required but is assured that the patient’s condition is stable enough not to worsen rapidly. The nurse can start intravenous lines, provide supplemental oxygen, perform an ECG, and connect the patient to a cardiac monitor before a physician is required at the bedside.

When assessing the necessity for urgent lifesaving measures, the triage nurse thoroughly examines the patient’s respiratory condition and oxygen saturation (SpO2) levels. Even if a patient is still breathing, severe respiratory distress or an SpO2 below 90 percent signals the need for prompt action to secure the airway and ensure adequate oxygenation. Such a patient will need the physician present to administer medications for rapid sequence intubation or to initiate other airway and breathing interventions.

Patients experiencing chest pain should also be assessed according to the same standards. Some individuals with chest pain are quite stable and may only need a diagnostic ECG, meaning they do not qualify for level-1 criteria. In contrast, those who appear pale, sweaty, in severe respiratory distress, or are hemodynamically unstable will need urgent, life-saving treatment and do fulfill level-1 criteria. Every patient with chest pain must be evaluated against the level-1 criteria to decide if immediate life-saving intervention is necessary.

When deciding if a patient needs immediate life-saving care, the triage nurse must evaluate the patient’s level of consciousness. The ESI algorithm utilizes the AVPU scale (alert, verbal, pain, unresponsive) as shown in Table 3-2. This step aims to identify patients experiencing a sudden change in consciousness. The nurse should look for deviations from the patient’s baseline, with particular concern for those who were previously alert but are now categorized as P (pain) or U (unresponsive). Unresponsiveness should be considered in the context of sudden neurological changes, and not in patients with pre-existing developmental delays, documented dementia, or aphasia. Any patient who is unresponsive—including those who are intoxicated and do not respond to painful stimuli—meets level-1 criteria and requires immediate assessment. For instance, a patient with a sudden decrease in mental status who cannot maintain their airway or is in severe respiratory distress would need urgent intervention.

Users familiar with ESI version 3 (v. 3) will observe a significant modification in the ESI level-1 criteria. The primary distinction between ESI v. 3 and ESI version 4 (v. 4) is the recognition and reclassification of some of the most critically ill patients, who were previously categorized as ESI level 2. Now, patients who need immediate life-saving interventions are assigned to ESI level 1. In the earlier version, a patient experiencing severe respiratory distress who needed intubation but was still breathing would have been placed in ESI level 2. Under the current version, this patient now qualifies for level 1. Additional examples of patients now considered ESI level 1 include those who are weak and dizzy with a heart rate of 30 or 200. While this adjustment may not impact a large number of patients, it ensures that the most critically ill are classified correctly. Before v. 4, triage nurses often faced two types of ESI level-2 patients: those needing immediate attention and those who could safely wait a short period (about 10 minutes) without worsening. This issue prompted a large, multi-center, prospective study to determine which ESI level-2 patients actually received immediate interventions (Tanabe et al., in press). Findings from that study led to the revision of the ESI system. This updated ESI handbook outlines these changes and introduces ESI v. 4.

An ESI level-1 patient does not necessarily arrive at the emergency department by ambulance. Individuals with drug overdoses or acute alcohol intoxication might be left at the entrance, while children could be brought in by car and carried inside. An experienced triage nurse can quickly recognize these critically ill patients. With a swift, visual assessment from a distance, the nurse identifies those in severe distress. These patients are promptly moved to the treatment area, where resuscitation begins immediately.

Patients classified as ESI level 1 make up about 1 to 3 percent of all emergency department cases (Eitel et al., 2003; Wuerz, Milne, Eitel, Travers & Gilboy, 2000; Wuerz et al., 2001). These patients require immediate resuscitation by either the emergency physician and nurse or the trauma or code team upon arrival. Research on ESI indicates that the majority of ESI level-1 patients are admitted to intensive care units, while some do not survive their time in the emergency department (Eitel et al., 2003; Wuerz, 2001). A small number of ESI level-1 patients are discharged from the ED if their altered level of consciousness or vital functions—such as those caused by hypoglycemia, seizures, alcohol intoxication, or anaphylaxis—are reversible.

Illustrations of ESI level 1:

Heart stoppage.

Cessation of breathing.

Acute difficulty breathing.

Oxygen saturation below 90%.

Severely injured trauma patient arriving in an unresponsive state.

Overdose presenting with a respiratory rate of 6.

Three general questions are utilized to assess if the patient satisfies level-2 criteria.

Is this considered a high-risk scenario?

2. Does the patient exhibit confusion, lethargy, or disorientation?

3. Is the patient experiencing significant pain or discomfort?

The triage nurse gathers relevant subjective and objective data to promptly address these questions. This section provides a concise overview of ESI level-2 criteria, with a more comprehensive discussion of patients qualifying for ESI level-2 to be covered in Chapter 4.

Severe breathing difficulty accompanied by agonal or gasping respirations.

Markedly slow or fast heart rate accompanied by evidence of inadequate tissue perfusion.

Low blood pressure accompanied by indications of inadequate tissue perfusion.

A trauma patient in need of urgent resuscitation with crystalloids and colloids.

Experiencing chest pain, appearing pale and sweaty, with a blood pressure of 70 by palpation.

Feeling faint and lightheaded, heart rate is 30.

Severe allergic response.

Infant exhibiting limpness.

Unconscious with a strong smell of alcohol.

Low blood sugar accompanied by altered mental state.

##### Decision Point B: Should the Patient Wait?

After the triage nurse establishes that the patient does not qualify for ESI level 1, they proceed to decision point B (refer to Figure 33). At this stage, the nurse must determine if the patient can safely wait to be evaluated. If waiting is not appropriate, the patient is assigned ESI level 2. If the patient can wait, the process continues to the following step in the algorithm.

###### Is This a High-risk Situation?

Drawing on a brief patient interview, general observations, and the intuition developed through experience, the triage nurse identifies patients at high risk. Often, factors such as the patient’s age and medical history play a role in this assessment. A high-risk patient is someone whose condition could quickly worsen or who shows symptoms indicating a need for urgent, time-sensitive care. This type of patient may face a significant threat to life or organ function. In most cases, a comprehensive physical exam or a complete set of vital signs is not necessary to recognize high risk. Instead, the patient may describe symptoms that an experienced triage nurse immediately recognizes as concerning. For instance, a patient who says, “I never get headaches and after lifting something heavy, I now have the worst headache of my life,” would be triaged as ESI level 2, as these symptoms could indicate a subarachnoid hemorrhage.

If a patient is classified as ESI level 2, the triage nurse has determined that it is not safe for them to wait in the waiting area for any period of time. Although ESI guidelines do not specify exact time frames, patients at ESI level 2 are a high priority and should typically be placed and begin receiving treatment within 10 minutes of their arrival. It is crucial to note that even though the criteria for level 1 have broadened in version 4 of the algorithm, ESI level 2 patients are still regarded as very ill and at significant risk. Immediate care is necessary, and a suitable bed must be located right away. In most cases, instead of proceeding to the next patient, the triage nurse recognizes the severity of the situation and promptly notifies the charge nurse or staff in the patient care area that an ESI level 2 patient requires urgent attention.

Instances of high-risk scenarios:

Experiencing ongoing chest pain suggestive of coronary syndrome, but currently stable and not in need of urgent life-saving treatment.

A healthcare worker experiencing a needlestick injury.

Shows symptoms of a stroke, but does not fulfill level-1 requirements.

Ectopic pregnancy has been ruled out; the patient is hemodynamically stable.

A patient undergoing chemotherapy, and thus immunosuppressed, presenting with a fever.

A patient exhibiting suicidal or homicidal tendencies.

Chapter 4 provides further details about high-risk situations.

###### Is the Patient Confused, Lethargic, or Disoriented?

This is the second question to consider at decision point B. Once more, the focus is on determining if the patient is showing a sudden change in consciousness. Patients who are normally confused do not qualify for level-2 criteria.

Confused: Shows unsuitable reactions to stimuli, with reduced attention span and impaired memory.

Lethargic: Sleepy, spends more time sleeping than normal, but reacts properly when prompted.

Disoriented: The patient cannot accurately respond to questions regarding time, location, or identity.

Instances of patients exhibiting confusion, lethargy, or disorientation:

Recent development of confusion in an older adult.

The mother reports that her 3-month-old baby is sleeping constantly.

The teenager was discovered in a state of confusion and disorientation.

All of these examples suggest that the brain could be impaired either in its structure or its chemistry.

###### Is This Patient in Severe Pain or Distress?

At decision point B, the triage nurse’s third question is whether the patient is experiencing pain or distress. If the answer is “no,” the nurse proceeds to the next step in the process. If the answer is “yes,” the nurse must evaluate the severity of the pain or distress, using clinical observation and/or a self-reported pain score of 7 or above on a 0 to 10 scale. When a patient reports pain at 7/10 or higher, the nurse may assign an ESI level 2, but this is not mandatory. Pain is a frequent reason for emergency department visits, and not all patients with pain scores of 7/10 or more require an ESI level-2 designation. For instance, a patient with a sprained ankle and pain rated at 8/10 would typically be classified as ESI level 4. Assigning a level 2 rating based solely on pain is not necessary in such cases.

In certain patients, pain can be evaluated through clinical observation, such as noting distressed facial expressions, sweating, body posture, and alterations in vital signs. The triage nurse looks for physical signs of acute pain that validate the patient’s reported pain level. For instance, a patient with abdominal pain who is sweating, has a rapid heart rate, and elevated blood pressure, or a patient experiencing severe flank pain accompanied by vomiting, pale skin, and a history of kidney stones, are both clear examples of individuals who qualify for ESI level-2. More details about ESI level 2 and pain assessment can be found in Chapter 4.

Severe distress may be either physical or mental. Instances of distress include a victim of sexual assault, an aggressive patient, or a person with bipolar disorder experiencing a manic episode.

ESI level-2 patients represent a relatively small but high-risk segment, making up 20 to 30 percent of emergency department visits (Travers et al., 2002; Wuerz et al., 2001; Tanabe, Gimbel et al., 2004). After identifying an ESI level-2 patient, the triage nurse must ensure prompt care. Registration may be handled by a family member or completed at the bedside. These patients require vital signs and a thorough nursing assessment, though this does not have to occur during triage. Patient placement should not be postponed to complete vital sign collection. Studies on ESI indicate that 50 to 60 percent of ESI level-2 patients are admitted from the emergency department (Wuerz et al., 2001).

##### Decision Point C: Resource Needs

If the responses to the first two decision points are “no,” the triage nurse proceeds to decision point C (refer to Figure 3-4). At this stage, the nurse should inquire, “How many different resources will this patient likely require for the physician to make a disposition decision?” Possible dispositions include discharging the patient home, admitting them to the observation unit or hospital, or transferring them to another facility. This step again calls for the triage nurse to rely on previous experience with similar emergency department cases. It is important for ED nurses to recognize that estimating resource needs is based on standards of care and is not influenced by the hospital’s type (teaching or non-teaching) or its location. Any patient arriving at an emergency department should generally utilize the same resources to reach a disposition. Taking into account the patient’s brief subjective and objective evaluation, medical history, allergies, medications, age, and gender, the nurse must determine how many different resources will be necessary for the physician to decide on a disposition. Essentially, what is the usual protocol for a patient presenting to the ED with this common complaint? The triage nurse should make this determination based on their assessment of the patient, focusing on standard practices in the specific ED rather than individual provider preferences.

To determine what resources are needed, the triage nurse should understand the standards of care in the emergency department. The nurse must also be aware of the idea of “prudent and customary.” An effective way to approach this is to consider, “Based on this patient’s main complaint or injury, what resources will the emergency physician probably use?” Resources may include hospital services, diagnostic tests, procedures, consultations, or interventions that go beyond the physician’s history and physical exam, as well as basic emergency department actions like applying a bandage. Additional details and examples can be found in Chapter 5.

Table 3-3 outlines what qualifies and does not qualify as a resource for ESI triage classification. Patients at ESI level 3 are expected to need two or more resources, those at ESI level 4 are anticipated to need one resource, and ESI level 5 patients are expected to need no resources, as shown in Table 3-4.

Studies indicate that ESI level-3 patients account for 30% to 40% of those treated in the emergency department (Eitel et al., 2003; Wuerz et al., 2001). These individuals typically need more comprehensive assessments but are considered stable in the short term, which can result in longer ED stays. ESI level 4 and 5 patients represent 20% to 35% of emergency department visits, and this percentage may be higher in areas with limited access to primary care. Properly trained mid-level providers with suitable skill sets could manage these patients in a fast-track or express care environment, especially since many present with trauma-related issues. Given their stable condition, it is safe for these patients to wait several hours before being seen.

##### Decision Point D:The Patient's Vital Signs

Prior to assigning a patient to ESI level 3, the nurse must review the patient’s vital signs to determine if they fall outside the normal range for the patient’s age and if these abnormalities are clinically significant. If the vital signs are abnormal, the triage nurse should consider elevating the triage level to ESI level 2. Ultimately, it is up to the triage nurse to decide whether the patient should be upgraded to ESI level 2 due to abnormal vital signs. This is referred to as decision point D.

Vital sign parameters vary by age (refer to Figure 3-5). The vital signs considered include pulse, respiratory rate, and oxygen saturation, with body temperature also assessed in children under three years old. Based on these criteria, a triage nurse may decide to upgrade an adult patient with a heart rate of 104, or keep them at ESI level 3. Similarly, a 6-month-old infant with a cold and a respiratory rate of 48 might be assigned to ESI level 2 or 3. The nurse must determine, using the patient’s history and physical exam, whether the vital signs indicate a high enough risk that the patient should not wait to be evaluated. Chapter 6 provides a detailed discussion of vital signs and includes examples.

Temperature is considered only for children younger than three years old. A high fever may prevent young children from being placed in categories 4 and 5. This approach helps to identify children who may have bacteremia and ensures they are not directed to a fast track area or made to wait for an extended period. Detailed pediatric fever guidelines will be provided in Chapter 6.

###### Does Time to Treatment Influence ESI Triage Categories?

Estimating how long a patient can wait before being seen by a doctor is a key part of most triage systems. The Australasian and Canadian Triage Systems specify that patients must be assessed by a physician within a set timeframe according to their triage level. In contrast, the ESI does not set strict time requirements for physician evaluation. Nonetheless, patients classified as ESI level 2 should receive prompt attention, though the exact timing is determined by each institution’s policy. There is often confusion between institutional policies, the actual process of patient care, and the ESI triage level.

We will present four patient cases where there may appear to be a contradiction between patient flow and triage category. Trauma patients often arrive at triage after experiencing a significant injury mechanism, such as being an unrestrained passenger in a high-speed car accident. Sometimes, these patients do not arrive by ambulance but instead come to triage on their own, reporting localized right upper quadrant pain and having stable vital signs. Although this patient is physiologically stable, walked into the emergency department, and does not meet the criteria for ESI level 1, they are still at high risk for injuries like a liver laceration and other serious trauma, so they should be assigned ESI level 2. Many emergency departments have trauma protocols and trauma response levels that require prompt initiation of care. Both triage level and trauma response level are important and should be documented as separate scores. While the triage nurse correctly identifies this as a physiologically stable trauma patient and assigns ESI level 2, she should also ensure the patient is placed and managed according to trauma policy. The patient is likely stable for at least another 10 minutes and does not need immediate life-saving measures. However, if the same patient arrived with a palpable blood pressure of 80, they would be classified as ESI level 1 and would need urgent, life-saving hemodynamic interventions.

Another instance of policies influencing triage levels involves patients presenting with stable chest pain. If a patient is physiologically stable but has chest pain that could indicate an acute coronary syndrome, they qualify for ESI level-2. These patients do not need immediate life-saving measures but are considered high-risk and require prompt attention. An ECG should be completed within 10 minutes of arrival, and many emergency departments have protocols to ensure rapid ECG initiation. Although care for these patients should begin quickly, the ECG itself is a diagnostic tool, not a life-saving intervention. If all patients with chest pain were assigned ESI level-1, it would make it challenging to prioritize those who truly need immediate life-saving care. However, a chest pain patient who arrives at triage sweating and with a palpable blood pressure of 80 would meet ESI level-1 criteria.

A third instance of time-critical care involves patients showing symptoms of an acute stroke. If the patient is physiologically stable, a delay of 10 minutes before starting treatment is unlikely to worsen their condition. On the other hand, a stroke patient who cannot maintain their airway qualifies for ESI level 1.

In another scenario, an elderly patient who has fallen and may have a hip fracture arrives with family by private car and is experiencing significant pain. Although the patient does not strictly qualify for ESI level 2, they are clearly uncomfortable. The triage nurse would assign an ESI level 3 and likely prioritize placing the patient in a bed ahead of other ESI level 3 patients. Similar situations can occur with patients arriving by ambulance. However, arriving by ambulance alone does not justify assigning ESI level 1 or 2. Triage level should always be determined using ESI criteria, regardless of how the patient arrived.

Overall, care for ESI level-2 patients should be expedited, with the goal of ensuring they wait no more than 10 minutes before being moved to the treatment area. It is crucial to note that although ESI version 4 has broadened level-1 criteria to include patients needing immediate interventions who were previously classified as level 2, all level-2 patients remain potentially very ill and need prompt assessment and care. The triage nurse has determined that it is unsafe for these patients to wait. While they may appear stable at present, their condition could quickly worsen, and timely diagnostic or therapeutic interventions may be critical (for example, a stable patient with chest pain should receive an ECG within 10 minutes of arrival), or they may face a possible major threat to life or organ function. ESI level-2 patients are still regarded as being at very high risk.

Given the current issue of ED overcrowding, it is common for triage nurses to encounter multiple ESI level-2 patients when there are no available ED beds. In these circumstances, there may be a temptation to “undertriage,” which can result in significant harm to patients and inaccurately reflect the ED’s patient population. When several ESI level-2 patients arrive at the same time, the triage nurse should assess each one using the ESI algorithm. This allows the nurse to prioritize among the level-2 patients, identifying those at greatest risk to guide decisions about patient placement.

##### Summary

In conclusion, the ESI is a straightforward five-level triage system that categorizes patients according to the severity of their condition and the resources they require. The ESI triage process relies on four main decision points. With this system, an experienced emergency department nurse can quickly and accurately assess and triage patients.

### Chapter 4. ESI Level 2

This chapter builds upon the initial overview of the ESI, emphasizing the importance of the experienced ED nurse’s clinical judgment. The ESI triage training program should allocate significant time to clarifying which patients qualify for ESI level 2. Here, we focus on typical patient scenarios that fulfill the criteria for ESI level 2.

Once the triage nurse has established that the patient does not need urgent life-saving care, the next step is to assess whether the patient can wait. In making this judgment, the triage nurse should ask, “Would I allocate my last available bed to this patient?” The three questions outlined in Figure 4-1 must be addressed, as they are essential elements of the ESI level-2 criteria.

Is this considered a high-risk scenario?

Is the patient showing signs of newly developed confusion, drowsiness, or disorientation?

3. Is the patient in significant pain or discomfort?

The rest of this chapter explores the decision-making aspects of ESI level 2 in depth. Numerous examples are included, illustrating potential medical diagnoses linked to patients’ chief complaints and symptoms. An experienced triage nurse will always evaluate the chief complaint, observed signs and symptoms, patient demographics, and medical history to help identify high-risk situations. Although the goal of nurse triage is not to establish a medical diagnosis, these scenarios rely on the triage nurse’s expertise regarding possible diagnoses related to specific complaints. Resources such as the Emergency Nursing Core Curriculum© and other emergency nursing textbooks offer valuable information on the signs and symptoms of various medical conditions. The following section highlights selected examples of high-risk situations, though it is not meant to be comprehensive. These examples are summarized in Table 4-1.

##### High-risk Situations

Recognizing high-risk situations is essential in the triage decision-making process, no matter which triage system is applied. The ESI emphasizes the significance of identifying high-risk cases and relies on the triage nurse’s knowledge and experience to determine which patients are at elevated risk.

There is limited literature on how emergency department triage nurses make decisions. While knowledge and experience are essential, they are not enough on their own. Another crucial element is intuition or a “sixth sense.” New triage nurses should be taught practical guidelines to follow until they gain the confidence and experience needed to make quick, accurate judgments. Examples of such guidelines include “assume all women of childbearing age are pregnant until proven otherwise” or “consider all chest pain as cardiac in origin until proven otherwise.” Novice nurses are also instructed in recognizing symptom clusters, such as the cardiac cluster of chest pain, nausea, shortness of breath, and sweating. Through previous clinical experiences, ED nurses develop what are known as clinical portraits—memories of specific patient cases they have encountered. For instance, a nurse will always recall a patient with fever, stiff neck, and a meningococcal rash when seeing a similar case in triage. With each triage situation, nurses must rely on their accumulated knowledge and experience. Experienced triage nurses should be able to easily recognize high-risk cases.

Vital signs alone are often insufficient for identifying patients at high risk. Patients usually arrive at the emergency department with a main complaint, symptoms, or a history that points to a potentially serious issue that can quickly worsen if not addressed immediately. Factors such as the patient’s age, medical history, and current medications often affect how severe the main complaint appears. For instance, an elderly, frail individual with intense abdominal pain faces a much greater risk of complications or death compared to a healthy 20-year-old. The older patient with abdominal pain should be assigned an ESI level 2, while the younger adult with stable vital signs is generally categorized as ESI level 3. Triage nurses frequently recognize high-risk cases, which may then be supported by abnormal vital signs. For example, a patient reporting fever and a productive cough might have a respiratory rate of 32 and an oxygen saturation of 90 percent. An experienced triage nurse can use their knowledge to determine that this patient likely has pneumonia, is at risk for further oxygen desaturation, and should be considered high risk. In contrast, less experienced emergency department nurses may lack the necessary skills to reliably identify high-risk situations and make correct triage decisions. As a result, an inexperienced triage nurse can be a liability, regardless of the triage system in place. They have not yet developed the ability to use symptom patterns, clinical scenarios, or intuition—essential tools for recognizing high-risk patients. The following section will outline specific examples of high-risk situations.

###### Abdominal and Gastrointestinal

Abdominal pain is a common reason for visits to the emergency department. What factors make it high risk? Taking a thorough history and evaluating the current pain level, respiratory rate, and heart rate are key components that help identify high-risk cases. Pain severity is just one aspect to consider. If severe abdominal pain is accompanied by tachycardia or respiratory distress, this may indicate shock and puts the patient at higher risk. Elderly patients with severe abdominal pain are also at increased risk, as they are more likely to suffer from bowel obstructions, gastrointestinal bleeding, and other abdominal issues that carry greater morbidity and mortality compared to younger individuals. It is crucial to look for signs and symptoms of an acute abdomen in all patients presenting with abdominal pain. Important questions include: How long has the pain been present? What prompted the patient to seek emergency care today? Has the patient experienced significant nausea, vomiting, or diarrhea? Is there evidence of dehydration? Patients who report severe, “tearing” abdominal pain that radiates to the back should be evaluated for a possible abdominal aortic aneurysm. This pain is typically described as intense, constant, and of sudden onset, and these patients may have a history of hypertension.

Patients presenting with abdominal pain are frequently assigned an ESI level 3 at the start of the triage assessment, but if tachycardia or additional risk factors are identified, the triage nurse may conclude that the patient is actually at high risk.

Vomiting blood or presenting with blood per rectum must be taken seriously and assessed alongside the patient’s vital signs. A 30-year-old with bright red rectal bleeding, stable vital signs, and no additional risk factors does not qualify for ESI level 2. However, an older adult who called emergency services due to vomiting blood and has a heart rate of 117 and a respiratory rate of 24 is considered high risk and does meet the criteria for ESI level 2.

###### Cardiovascular

Chest pain is a frequent reason for seeking medical care. The symptoms of acute coronary syndromes (ACS) can be vague, making it challenging to assess ACS risk during triage. Patients experiencing chest or epigastric discomfort, whether or not they have additional symptoms, typically require a prompt ECG to check for ACS and should be considered high risk—classified as ESI level 2. Triage nurses must be aware of how heart disease can present differently, especially in women. For instance, a 54-year-old obese woman arriving at the emergency department with epigastric pain and fatigue is at risk for ACS and should be assigned to ESI level 2 as high risk. Patients with chest pain who are unstable and need immediate interventions like intubation or hemodynamic support should be categorized as ESI level 1. Not all patients with chest pain fall into level 1 or 2. For example, a healthy 20-year-old with chest pain, cough, and a fever of 101°F is at low risk for ACS and does not meet ESI level 1 or 2 criteria. Each case must be evaluated individually. Other high-risk cardiovascular conditions include possible hypertensive emergencies, acute arterial occlusions, and patients with fever following valve replacement surgery.

###### Dental, Ear, Nose, and Throat

While less frequent, epiglottitis still occurs and poses a possible threat to the airway. Patients with a peritonsillar abscess also face potential airway compromise, and both conditions are considered high-risk. If a patient with either issue is at immediate risk of airway obstruction and needs urgent intervention, they meet level-1 criteria. For those presenting with epistaxis, the triage nurse should check blood pressure, even though this step is not included in the ESI algorithm. Causes of epistaxis may include a posterior nosebleed from a hypertensive crisis, nose picking in a patient taking Coumadin®, or recent cocaine use. Regardless of the cause, these patients should be assigned ESI level 2, as they are considered high-risk.

###### Environmental

Individuals with inhalation injuries are at elevated risk for possible airway obstruction. If a patient exhibits marked airway distress necessitating urgent intervention, they fulfill level-1 criteria.

###### Facial

Individuals who have sustained facial trauma need to be assessed for potential facial fractures. Such fractures frequently occur alongside other serious injuries and can result in airway obstruction, making them high-risk cases that require urgent attention. If facial trauma has already caused airway compromise, the patient should be assigned an ESI level 1 to prioritize airway intervention. Cases with a significant risk of airway compromise should be classified as ESI level 2.

###### General Medical

A number of other general medical issues should be evaluated for potential high-risk scenarios. These complications include diabetic ketoacidosis, abnormal blood sugar levels (either high or low), sepsis, episodes of fainting or near-fainting, and various electrolyte imbalances that may require urgent intervention. Hyperkalemia, in particular, poses a significant risk as it can cause dangerous heart rhythm disturbances. This condition should be considered in dialysis patients who present with weakness. Additionally, cancer patients receiving chemotherapy who develop a fever are at increased risk for sepsis and must be recognized as high-risk and assessed promptly.

###### Genitourinary

Men experiencing testicular torsion typically report intense pain, are readily identifiable, and need prompt assessment, surgical treatment, and immediate pain management. Another high-risk genitourinary emergency involves renal dialysis patients who cannot finish their dialysis sessions, as they may have multiple electrolyte imbalances. Both women and men, though more frequently men, may arrive at triage with sudden urinary retention. Men over 65 often present with benign prostatic hypertrophy leading to an inability to urinate. Postoperative urinary retention can also occur in both sexes. These individuals are in significant distress and require urgent urinary catheterization. Such cases represent patients in severe distress who should be assigned an ESI level 2.

###### Mental Health

Patients presenting with mental health issues are considered high risk if they pose a threat to themselves, others, or their surroundings. Individuals who are suicidal, homicidal, psychotic, violent, or at risk of fleeing should be classified as high risk. Intoxication alone, without evidence of trauma or risk of aspiration, does not qualify as high risk. However, intoxicated patients should be thoroughly evaluated for trauma or behavioral concerns linked to alcohol use or their medical history, as either could indicate a high-risk scenario, warranting an ESI level 2 classification.

###### Neurological

Patients experiencing severe headaches along with changes in mental status, elevated blood pressure, lethargy, fever, or a rash should be regarded as high risk. Additionally, any individual who suddenly develops speech difficulties or motor weakness should be categorized as ESI level 2. These symptoms may indicate an acute stroke, making prompt assessment essential. The time since symptom onset is a key consideration when determining possible treatments, especially for fibrinolytic or other interventions. If a patient with no prior history of headaches arrives at the emergency department with a sudden headache, they should be considered at high risk for a subarachnoid hemorrhage. Such patients often recall exactly what they were doing when the headache started, which frequently follows activities like lifting, having a bowel movement, or engaging in sexual activity.

###### Obstetrical and Gynecological

Women presenting with abdominal pain or vaginal bleeding should be thoroughly evaluated, and vital signs should be recorded unless there is an immediate life-threatening condition. For all women of reproductive age, it is essential to obtain a pregnancy history and determine the date of the last menstrual period. The triage nurse should look for symptoms of abruptio placentae and placenta previa in women who are in late pregnancy. In early pregnancy, assessment should focus on identifying signs of ectopic pregnancy and spontaneous abortion. Pregnant patients who are between 14 and 20 weeks gestation or further along should be promptly evaluated by a physician, following the specific guidelines of the institution. Postpartum women who report heavy vaginal bleeding should also receive urgent medical attention from a physician. Any woman, whether pregnant or postpartum, who exhibits significant hemodynamic instability and requires immediate life-saving measures should be assigned an ESI level 1 during triage.

###### Ocular

Patients who experience eye trauma, sudden partial or complete vision loss, or chemical exposure to the eye are at significant risk for lasting eye damage and should be assigned to ESI level 2 triage. Visual loss can be caused by conditions such as central retinal artery occlusion, acute narrow-angle glaucoma, and retinal detachment. Eye injuries may lead to globe rupture or hyphema. Chemical exposures, especially from alkali substances, require prompt irrigation to minimize corneal injury. Each of these situations demands urgent assessment and intervention to avoid further harm or worsening of the condition. These cases fulfill the requirements for ESI level 2. Although immediate eye irrigation is crucial, it is not classified as a life-saving measure, so these patients do not qualify for ESI level 1.

###### Orthopedic

Patients exhibiting signs and symptoms of compartment syndrome face a significant risk of losing the affected limb and should be categorized as ESI level 2. Other orthopedic injuries considered high-risk include any limb injury with impaired neurovascular status, partial or complete amputations, or injuries resulting from mechanisms known to be high-risk, such as severe acceleration or deceleration. Individuals with suspected fractures of the pelvis, femur, or hip, as well as other limb dislocations, require thorough assessment and monitoring of vital signs, as these injuries can lead to substantial blood loss. If a patient is hemodynamically unstable and requires immediate life-saving intervention, they should be classified as ESI level 1.

###### Pediatrics

Triage nurses often feel uneasy when determining the acuity level for pediatric patients, particularly infants. Gathering a precise history from the caregiver and assessing the child’s activity are crucial steps. A child who cannot be comforted or who appears withdrawn may be at significant risk for severe illness. The situations below illustrate examples of high-risk conditions in children:

Convulsions.

Severe dehydration and sepsis.

A complication of diabetes known as diabetic ketoacidosis.

Burns resulting from child abuse.

Injury to the head.

Overdoses or ingestion of vitamins, iron, or other substances.

An infant younger than 28 days old who has a temperature of 100.4° F (38° C) or higher.

###### Transplant

Patients who have undergone organ transplantation are typically unwell and classified as high risk. They may develop organ rejection, sepsis, or other complications. Individuals awaiting transplantation are also generally regarded as high risk.

###### Respiratory

Numerous respiratory issues can put patients at significant risk. Those experiencing mild to moderate distress should undergo further assessment of their respiratory rate and pulse oximetry to decide if they should be classified as ESI level 2. Patients exhibiting severe respiratory distress who need immediate lifesaving measures, such as intubation, qualify for level-1 categorization. A high-risk patient is someone who is currently breathing and oxygenating sufficiently but is in respiratory distress and at risk of rapid decline. Causes of respiratory distress may include asthma, pulmonary embolism, pleural effusion, pneumothorax, inhalation of toxic smoke, foreign body aspiration, or shortness of breath accompanied by chest pain.

###### Toxicological

The majority of patients presenting with an overdose require prompt assessment, as these cases are considered high risk. Identifying the specific substances ingested and the amounts involved is frequently challenging. If a patient has intentionally overdosed and expresses suicidal thoughts, this also qualifies as a high-risk scenario. Patients who arrive without breathing or need urgent lifesaving measures should be assigned ESI level 1, while all other admitted overdose cases should be classified as ESI level 2.

###### Trauma

Patients who have experienced a traumatic event are often at significant risk for injury, even if no visible injuries are present. Any injury mechanism that carries a high risk should be classified as ESI level 2, unless the patient has unstable vital signs and needs immediate intervention, in which case they should be assigned ESI level 1. Serious injuries occur due to the transfer of mechanical or kinetic energy, typically from acceleration, deceleration, or both. Examples include motor vehicle and motorcycle accidents, falls, and gunshot or stab wounds, all of which involve blunt or penetrating trauma and require thorough assessment for possible severe injury. The triage nurse should gather information such as the patient’s age, any pre-existing medical conditions, environmental factors, the height of a fall or jump, the speed of the vehicle involved, any history of loss of consciousness, the site of a penetrating injury, and the type of weapon used. The nurse will use their understanding of biomechanics and injury mechanisms to evaluate the patient and determine if they meet ESI level 2 criteria. Gunshot wounds to the head, neck, chest, or groin generally necessitate trauma team involvement and immediate care, and should be triaged as ESI level 1.

###### Wound Management

What factors classify a wound as high risk? Is there ongoing, uncontrolled bleeding? Is there evidence of arterial bleeding? Does the injury involve a partial amputation? How did the wound occur, and does the cause put the patient at increased risk for additional traumatic issues? The majority of wounds do not qualify for ESI level 2. For example, a patient with a stab wound to the thigh that only affects the subcutaneous tissue, has bleeding under control, and maintains good neurological function in the limb can be assigned to ESI level 4. However, any wound with uncontrolled bleeding that demands immediate, lifesaving action to stabilize the patient falls under level 1 criteria.

##### Confusion/Lethargy/ Disorientation

The second consideration when assessing if a patient qualifies for level-2 criteria is whether they are experiencing new confusion, lethargy, or disorientation. Changes in mental status are a common reason for seeking care. Patients with these symptoms are often brought to the emergency department by relatives, friends, or emergency personnel. At decision point B in the ESI algorithm, confusion, lethargy, or disorientation indicates a recent or sudden change in consciousness. Ongoing dementia or chronic confusion does not satisfy the requirements for ESI level 2. Acute confusion, lethargy, or disorientation can result from several serious medical issues, such as stroke, transient ischemic attack, other brain structural abnormalities, metabolic or electrolyte disturbances like hypoglycemia or hyponatremia, and toxicological problems.

This part of the algorithm is typically straightforward and offers minimal room for misinterpretation. When a patient arrives at triage with an unknown medical history and is confused, lethargic, or disoriented, the triage nurse should presume these symptoms are new and assign the patient to ESI level 2. However, if the patient exhibits new confusion, lethargy, or disorientation and needs an immediate life-saving intervention as outlined earlier, they should be categorized as ESI level 1.

##### Severe Pain/Distress

The last consideration in deciding if the patient qualifies for level-2 is whether they are experiencing severe pain or distress. The patient must be evaluated for significant pain or distress. Any patient reporting a pain score of 7 out of 10 or higher should be evaluated for ESI level-2 criteria.

The word "considered" holds significant importance. It is ultimately the triage nurse’s judgment to decide if the combination of the patient’s clinical condition and reported pain level justifies assigning an ESI level 2. For instance, a patient whose toe was struck by a heavy metal object might report their pain as 10 out of 10. The patient could indeed have a fracture and be in intense pain, and may not have attempted any pain relief before arriving at the emergency department. In this scenario, the appropriate triage level would be ESI level 4, as only one resource—an x-ray—will be required. The triage nurse should provide comfort measures at triage, such as applying ice, elevating the foot, and administering pain medication if protocols allow, to help alleviate the pain. The nurse should accept the patient’s report of severe pain and address it during triage. Nevertheless, this patient can safely wait to be seen and should not be prioritized for the last available bed. In conclusion, the triage nurse evaluates not just the patient’s reported pain score, but also considers the main complaint, medical history, and the patient’s physical presentation when assigning a triage level. Patients for whom severe pain could justify an ESI level 2 rating include:

A patient experiencing severe (10/10) flank pain and visibly writhing during triage.

An 80-year-old woman experiencing generalized abdominal pain rated 7 out of 10, accompanied by intense nausea.

A 30-year-old individual experiencing an acute pain crisis due to sickle cell disease.

A cancer patient experiencing intense pain.

Any burn, whether full-thickness or partial-thickness, that necessitates prompt pain management.

All emergency department patients should be evaluated for pain and asked to rate their pain using a tool like the visual analog scale. Many triage nurses feel uneasy about recording a patient’s pain score and then having the patient wait to be seen. It is crucial for triage nurses to recognize that a patient’s self-reported pain score is just one aspect of the overall pain assessment. For instance, triage nurses often encounter patients who appear comfortable—such as laughing, talking on the phone, or eating—yet claim their pain is 10 or higher. Triage nurses should assign an ESI level 2 if a patient reports a pain score of 7 out of 10 or more and the nurse’s subjective and objective evaluation indicates that the pain requires interventions beyond what can be provided at triage. In such cases, the triage nurse determines it is inappropriate for the patient to wait and assigns them to the last available bed.

Ultimately, when deciding if a patient qualifies for ESI level-2, the triage nurse needs to evaluate for severe distress, which can be either physiological or psychological. Besides pain, patients with significant respiratory distress fulfill the physiological criteria for ESI level 2. Severe psychological distress may be seen in patients who are:

Overwhelmed with distress following a sexual assault.

Displaying disruptive behavior during triage.

Aggressive.

Individuals who have experienced domestic abuse.

Undergoing an intense response to grief.

These patients are typically prioritized by the triage nurse to be taken directly to the treatment area, allowing them to bypass the waiting room.

##### Summary

We have examined the essential elements and questions required to assess if a patient qualifies for ESI level-2. It is vital for the triage nurse to take these questions into account when evaluating every patient. Overlooking a high-risk scenario could lead to longer wait times and possibly adverse outcomes for the patient.

### Chapter 5. Expected Resource Needs

Historically, triage systems have relied exclusively on assessing the severity of a patient’s condition. In these systems, nurses determine an acuity level by judging how long a patient can safely wait before being evaluated by a healthcare provider. The Emergency Severity Index (ESI) introduces a different method by not only considering which patients require immediate attention, but also, for those with less severe conditions, estimating the resources that will likely be needed to manage their care. This chapter provides background on the rationale for incorporating resource prediction into the ESI and explains what is considered a resource. It also presents examples of patients classified as ESI levels 3 to 5, along with the anticipated resources each will require.

Traditionally, comprehensive triage has served as the primary approach for assigning triage acuity in U.S. emergency departments (Emergency Nurses Association [ENA], 1997, pp. 3-10; Gilboy, Travers & Wuerz, 1999). These triage systems rely on the nurse’s evaluation of vital signs, both subjective and objective data, medical history, allergies, and current medications to determine the level of triage acuity.

Predicting resource needs is a key component of the ESI for patients classified as ESI level 3, 4, or 5. It is essential to note that resource allocation does not apply to patients with high acuity, such as those at ESI level 1 or 2. Resource prediction sets the ESI apart from other triage systems that focus solely on acuity. When Drs. Wuerz and Eitel developed the ESI triage system, they incorporated resource utilization to provide additional information and enable more precise triage decisions. They believed that experienced emergency department (ED) triage nurses could anticipate the types and quantities of tests, treatments, and consultations a patient would require during their ED visit. This has been confirmed by recent studies on ESI implementation and validation, which have demonstrated that triage nurses can accurately predict the resource needs of ED patients (Eitel, Travers, Rosenau, Gilboy & Wuerz, 2003; Tanabe, Gimbel, Yarnold & Adams, 2004). One such study, conducted across seven EDs in diverse regions—including both urban and rural settings, as well as academic and community hospitals—found that nurses using the ESI correctly predicted the number of resources needed by ED patients 70 percent of the time. In other words, ESI categorization by skilled triage nurses reliably forecasts at triage how many resources patients will need to reach ED disposition, and, more importantly, distinguishes between patients who will require low versus high resource intensity. This differentiation based on resource needs enables more efficient patient flow at ED presentation by directing patients into different operational pathways, allowing for parallel processing. Additionally, research has shown that ESI triage levels are associated with significant patient outcomes, such as admission and mortality rates (Eitel et al., 2003).

It is important to remember that resource prediction applies only to patients who are less acutely ill. At decision points A and B in the ESI algorithm (Figure 5-1), the nurse determines if patients qualify for ESI levels 1 or 2 solely based on how severe their condition is. At decision point C, however, the nurse assigns ESI levels 3 through 5 by evaluating both the patient’s acuity and the anticipated resources required. Therefore, the triage nurse takes resource needs into account only if the responses to decision points A and B are “no.”

To determine what resources an ED patient may require, the triage nurse should have a broad understanding of emergency department care standards and, more specifically, know what is considered reasonable and typical emergency care. One simple way to approach this is to consider, “Based on this patient’s main complaint, which resources are emergency providers most likely to use?”

The triage nurse relies on information gathered from a brief subjective and objective assessment, along with the patient’s medical history, current medications, age, and gender, to estimate how many resources the emergency department provider will require to make a decision about the patient’s care. For instance, a healthy teenager with a straightforward leg cut and no significant medical background would likely need just one resource: suturing. Conversely, an elderly patient with several chronic conditions and no prior episodes of dizziness who arrives with a head laceration from a fall will obviously require multiple resources, such as suturing, laboratory tests, an ECG, imaging studies, or specialist consultations. Proper application of the ESI triage system depends on the nurse’s ability to anticipate resource needs, making it most effective when performed by a seasoned emergency nurse. Overall, regardless of the triage method used, we maintain that triage should be conducted by an experienced emergency nurse to ensure patient safety.

Table 5-1 (also shown as Table 3-1) outlines the guidelines for classifying resources in the ESI triage system. The distinction between ESI levels 3, 4, and 5 is based on the nurse’s assessment of the number of resources a patient will require for disposition. According to the triage nurse’s judgment, patients anticipated to need no resources are assigned to level 5, those expected to need one resource are placed in level 4, and patients likely to require two or more resources are categorized as ESI level 3. Research has demonstrated that patients needing two or more resources have increased rates of hospital admission, higher mortality, and longer emergency department stays (Eitel et al., 2003; Tanabe et al., 2004 Reliability and validity).

While Table 5-1 does not include every possible resource, it offers general direction regarding the types of diagnostic tests, procedures, and treatments that are considered resources within the ESI system. Emergency nurses using the ESI should avoid focusing too much on the specific definitions of each resource. The key point is that ESI only requires the triage nurse to estimate the resources a patient will likely need during their ED visit. Table 5-1 lists the most frequently used resources, but compiling an all-inclusive list of ED resources is neither feasible nor required. For accurate ESI assignment, it is sufficient to determine whether a patient will need no resources, one resource, or two or more resources. Once a triage nurse identifies two likely resources, further estimation is unnecessary. The main purpose of the ESI resource component is to distinguish patients with more complex, resource-intensive needs from those with simpler issues. For ESI triage, resources are defined as interventions that go beyond a basic exam or minor interventions by ED staff, or that involve personnel outside the ED. Resources that demand significant ED staff time (such as administering IV medications or inserting a chest tube) or require assistance from outside departments (like radiology for x-rays or surgical consultations) tend to increase the patient’s ED stay and reflect a higher level of complexity and triage category.

There are frequently asked questions regarding what qualifies as an ESI resource. One common question concerns how many blood or urine tests and x-rays count as a resource. According to the ESI triage system, the triage nurse should consider the number of different types of resources required to decide the patient’s disposition, rather than counting each individual test.

A complete blood count (CBC) and an electrolyte panel together make up a single laboratory test resource.

A complete blood count and a chest x-ray are two types of resources (laboratory test and imaging).

A CBC and a urinalysis are both laboratory tests, and when performed together, they are considered a single resource.

A chest x-ray and standard skull radiographs are one type of resource (x-ray).

Cervical spine X-rays and a head CT scan are two imaging resources (X-ray and CT scan).

Another commonly debated resource is the use of a splint, which is not considered a resource. If it were, patients with ankle sprains would be classified as ESI level 3 (requiring an x-ray and splint). Although applying a splint can require significant effort, it’s important to remember that resource prediction is solely intended to categorize patients and ensure they are directed to the appropriate area within the ED. In many emergency departments, ESI level-3 patients are not suitable for fast track or urgent care sections. Triage scores do not reflect the overall intensity of nursing workload.

Another frequently asked question about ESI resources concerns the inclusion of eye irrigation as a resource. Patients who experience a chemical splash to the eye are typically classified as ESI level-2 due to the high-risk nature of their injury, so the need for eye irrigation does not influence their ESI level. On the other hand, if the eye issue is caused by dust particles, the patient is not automatically considered high risk. In such cases, eye irrigation is counted as a resource, placing the patient at ESI level-4. The eye examination itself is not considered a resource since it is part of the standard physical exam. Additional questions about resources are answered in Chapter 5’s Frequently Asked Questions section in Appendix A.

Clinicians often ask about the items categorized as “not resources” in Table 5-1. This list is designed to help triage nurses efficiently and accurately assign patients to one of five clinically distinct levels (Wuerz, Milne, Eitel, Travers & Gilboy, 2000). Items considered not to be resources include physical examinations, point-of-care testing, and procedures that generally do not increase a patient’s length of stay in the emergency department or suggest greater complexity. Because it is standard practice for all ED patients to receive a basic history and physical exam, these assessments—including pelvic exams—are not counted as resources for ESI classification. The strength of the ESI lies in its straightforwardness; the main aim of identifying resources is to distinguish patients with more complex needs who require two or more resources (level 3 or higher) from those with less complicated issues who will likely need fewer than two resources (level 4 or 5). Emergency nurses should avoid overcomplicating the ESI by focusing too much on the specifics of resource definitions. In most cases, a patient will need either no resources, one resource, or two or more resources.

Although resource use can differ depending on the location, provider, or even the individual patient, triage nurses are encouraged to base their ESI resource predictions on the typical management of the most frequent presenting issues. Ideally, patients with similar complaints should require roughly the same resources at any emergency department. For instance, if an 82-year-old nursing home resident with an indwelling urinary catheter arrives with a primary complaint of fever and cough, the provider will likely request blood and urine tests as well as a chest x-ray. The triage nurse can reasonably anticipate that this patient will need two or more resources and should therefore assign an ESI level 3.

While there may be slight differences in procedures among various emergency departments, these usually do not significantly impact the triage rating. For instance, some departments perform pregnancy tests within the ED (which ESI does not count as a resource), while others send the tests to the lab (which ESI does count as a resource). However, it is uncommon for patients to require only a pregnancy test, as most will need at least one additional resource. One operational difference that could lead to varying ESI levels is how patients with a sole complaint of sore throat are managed. In some hospitals, throat cultures are routinely taken (counted as one resource, ESI level 4), whereas in others, they are not (no resources, ESI level 5). Another example is the application of the Ottawa Ankle Rules, which help determine if an ankle x-ray is necessary for patients with ankle injuries. The use of these rules differs between institutions; those that implement them at triage may order fewer x-rays compared to those that do not use the rules regularly.

Temperature is a key factor in evaluating the allocation of resources for infants and young children. This topic will be discussed in Chapter 6.

Clinically, patients classified as ESI level 4 and 5 can wait several hours before being seen by a provider. However, from a customer service perspective, these individuals may be better managed in a fast-track or urgent care environment. Appropriately trained and supervised mid-level practitioners are capable of caring for level-4 and 5 patients. The ESI system also offers an operational benefit, as level-5 patients can occasionally be accommodated for a brief evaluation and disposition by a provider, even when the department is full. Frequently, triage protocols specify that ESI level-4 or 5 patients may be directed to an urgent care or fast-track area.

In conclusion, the ESI introduces a novel method for emergency department triage by incorporating predictions regarding the number of resources required to determine patient disposition. For patients classified as ESI levels 3, 4, and 5, resource needs are factored into the triage level, whereas decisions for ESI levels 1 and 2 rely solely on the severity of the patient's condition. Table 5-2 provides examples of patients in ESI levels 3, 4, and 5. In practice, estimating resource needs has proven highly useful for managing the large volume of patients presenting with non-acute issues.

### Chapter 6.The Role of Vital Signs in ESI Triage

##### Introduction Figure 6-1. Danger Zone Vital Signs

This chapter centers on decision point D, which involves evaluating the patient's vital signs. By this stage in the ESI algorithm, the triage nurse has already established that the patient does not qualify for ESI level 1 or 2 and will need two or more resources. Because the patient requires at least two resources, they are classified as at least ESI level 3. At this juncture, the nurse reviews the patient's vital signs, including heart rate, respiratory rate, and oxygen saturation, and, for children under three, temperature as well. If any of the vital signs exceed the danger zone thresholds (as shown in decision point D, Figure 6-1), the nurse should seriously consider upgrading the patient from level 3 to level 2.

In the ESI triage training program, significant time should be allocated to discussing how vital signs impact the decision to reclassify a patient from ESI level 3 to ESI level 2. It must be emphasized that the experienced triage nurse is ultimately responsible for determining if a patient qualifies for ESI level 2, taking into account the patient’s medical history, current medications, and both subjective and objective assessments, including overall appearance. This determination relies on the nurse’s clinical expertise and understanding of normal vital sign ranges across all age groups, as well as the effects of factors like medications, medical history, and pain level.

##### What Are Vital Signs?

Vital signs are typically basic measurements of physiological functions such as temperature, blood pressure, pulse, respiratory rate, and pulse oximetry (refer to Table 6-1). These measurements often guide healthcare professionals in choosing a specific course of action. In recent years, nursing literature has increasingly highlighted the significance of pain, with the American Pain Society introducing the term “Pain: the fifth vital sign” to raise awareness among healthcare providers about the need to assess and manage pain. Pain evaluation is a key part of the ESI and is actually considered earlier in its process. For ESI purposes, the vital sign parameters used at decision point D for children under three years old include heart rate, respiratory rate, oxygen saturation, and temperature. Vital signs provide objective information that helps determine a patient’s general health status and viability. The results influence how we assess a patient’s overall condition and the subsequent steps in diagnosis and treatment. Nevertheless, vital signs alone do not offer a complete understanding of a patient’s state. They can be influenced by various factors such as prescription drugs, herbal supplements, and recreational substances. For instance, beta-blockers can cause a slower heart rate and mask the typical rapid heart rate seen in shock. Hypothyroidism, especially in older adults, may result in low body temperature even during severe infections like sepsis. Similarly, a young adult’s high body temperature could be due to recreational drug use.

Vital signs are fluctuating, dynamic markers that supplement a patient’s assessment. Their measurement can depend on the person taking them, and what is considered normal varies depending on the source referenced. Even in optimal circumstances, vital signs may not always be dependable or precise (Edmonds, Mower, Lovato & Lomeli, 2002). Often, the patient’s overall appearance and clinical context are most informative. Nevertheless, if a triage nurse believes that obtaining vital signs would assist in evaluating risk, they should be recorded. For instance, if a patient is on immunosuppressive drugs, undergoing chemotherapy, or has an illness like AIDS that suppresses the immune system, it is important to check their body temperature.

##### Are Vital Signs Necessary at Triage?

Before the introduction of five-level triage in the United States, it was customary for all patients arriving at an emergency department to have their vital signs measured prior to being assigned a triage level. Vital signs were viewed as a crucial part of the initial nursing evaluation and frequently guided decision-making. In the traditional three-level triage system, vital signs played a key role in determining how long a patient could safely wait for care; if vital signs were normal, the patient was often allowed to wait longer. As a result, vital signs historically carried significant weight in triage assessments, sometimes more so than the patient’s clinical presentation.

Recently, updated triage models recommend that vital signs be used selectively during triage (Gilboy, Travers & Wuerz, 2000). Taking initial vital signs is not a required part of other five-level triage systems and is generally not performed during the triage of level-1 or level-2 patients, who are the most critically ill. For instance, the Guidelines for Implementation of the Australasian Triage Scale in Emergency Departments specify that “vital signs should only be measured at triage if required to estimate urgency, or if time permits” (Australasian College for Emergency Medicine, 2000). Likewise, the Canadian Triage and Acuity Scale (CTAS) states that vital signs are only needed if they are essential for determining the triage level, particularly for levels 3, 4, and 5, and only if time allows (Beveridge et al., 2002). The Manchester Triage Group incorporates specific vital sign criteria as decision points within its flow chart, using these parameters as one of the elements to help the triage nurse determine the patient’s acuity level.

Vital signs are not always the best method for determining triage acuity. Some research indicates that taking vital signs may not be essential during the initial triage assessment. In 2002, Cooper, Flaherty, Lin, and Hubbell studied how vital signs influence triage status, also taking into account factors like age and communication skills. Their research involved over 14,000 patients across 24 U.S. emergency departments. The findings showed that vital signs altered the triage acuity level in only 8% of cases. When looking at specific age groups, children aged 2 or younger experienced the greatest change in triage decisions, with an 11.4% difference after vital signs were measured.

##### Vital Signs and ESI Triage

With ESI triage, the only mandatory situation for checking vital signs is for patients who do not initially qualify as ESI level 1 or 2, but are expected to require two or more resources. For patients assigned to ESI levels 1, 2, 4, or 5, taking vital signs at triage is optional and left to the triage nurse’s judgment. Although the ESI system does not mandate vital sign assessment for every patient at triage, individual institutions may have their own protocols. Hospital policies on vital sign assessment at triage are shaped by factors like staffing, patient mix, and available resources, which are not addressed in this handbook. Generally, it is always acceptable to take vital signs when triaging a stable patient. According to ESI, only level-3 patients are required to have vital signs checked. (Refer to Table 6-2)

The creators of the ESI and the current research team agree that experienced emergency department nurses can use vital sign information to supplement their clinical judgment when assigning ESI ratings to patients. However, there is limited evidence linking abnormal vital signs to emergency department acuity or confirming that these abnormalities reliably indicate serious illness. The ESI has been updated over time to incorporate new evidence and recommendations from the literature. Initially, the ESI working group relied on systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS) research (Rangel-Frausto et al., 1995) to develop the danger zone vital sign criteria and related footnotes. The first ESI version used SIRS criteria, including a heart rate over 90 in adults, as a definitive reason to upgrade a patient from ESI level 3 to level 2 (Wuerz, Milne, Eitel, Traers & Gilboy, 2000). The SIRS studies focused on mortality predictors in intensive care unit patients. Due to a high number of false positives when applying these criteria to emergency department patients in the initial ESI hospitals, the heart rate threshold was increased to 100 in ESI version 2, and nurses were advised to consider upgrading adult patients with heart rates above 100 to ESI level 2 (Wuerz et al., 2001; Gilboy, Tanabe, Travers, Eitel & Wuerz, 2003). Pediatric vital sign parameters were also incorporated into the danger zone vital signs criteria.

When applying ESI as a triage method, it is not required to assess vital signs in the triage area for patients who are promptly assigned to level 1 or 2. If a patient appears unstable or has a primary complaint that demands immediate intervention, they should be quickly moved to the treatment area. In such cases, the resuscitation team is tasked with obtaining and monitoring vital signs at the bedside. This includes patients whose clinical presentation suggests a high risk or an urgent need for cardiovascular or respiratory support, such as those who look pale, sweaty, or cyanotic. Nevertheless, the triage nurse may choose to check vital signs in the triage area if there is no available bed or if they believe that vital sign data could help confirm the patient’s triage level. Some patients may only be recognized as ESI level 1 after their vital signs are measured. For instance, an elderly patient who is awake and alert but complains of dizziness may be found to have a critical condition if their heart rate is discovered to be 32 or 180 during the assessment.

As outlined in the ESI algorithm in Chapter 3, when patients do not qualify for ESI level-1 or 2, the triage nurse proceeds to decision point C. At this stage, the nurse evaluates how many resources the patient is likely to require in the emergency department. If only one or no resources are anticipated, the patient can be categorized as ESI level 4 or 5, and a vital sign check is not needed. However, if two or more resources are expected to be necessary, the nurse moves to decision point D, where vital signs should be measured. Vital signs are particularly significant for some patients during triage, especially those assigned to ESI level 3, as their values can provide additional evidence of possible serious illness. If any vital signs fall within the danger zone, it is advised that the triage nurse consider upgrading the patient from level 3 to level 2.

The ESI triage system specifically incorporates heart rate, respiratory rate, and oxygen saturation (for patients who may have respiratory issues) as vital signs. Temperature is only factored into ESI triage for children younger than three years old. Notably, blood pressure is not part of the ESI algorithm when evaluating abnormal vital signs. However, this does not imply that triage nurses should avoid measuring blood pressure or temperature in older children or adults; rather, these measurements are not typically used to determine the correct triage acuity level.

##### Vital Signs and Pediatric Fever

In this edition of the ESI Handbook, version 4 (v.4) of the ESI algorithm has been revised to reflect updated pediatric fever guidelines. As illustrated in Figure 6-2, note D of the ESI algorithm covers pediatric fever criteria relevant to ESI triage. This portion includes guidance from the American College of Emergency Physicians’ Clinical Policy for Children Under Three Years Old Presenting to the Emergency Department With Fever (ACEP, 2003).

The ESI Triage Research Team advises that vital signs should be checked in patients younger than 3 years old during triage. Specifically, taking a temperature is crucial for all children from birth up to 36 months, and assessing vital signs is a key part of evaluating any infant under 36 months with a known fever (Baraff, 2000). This process helps distinguish between ESI level-2 and level-3 patients and reduces the chance that children who may have bacteremia are directed to express care or face an inappropriate delay. It is important to note that any patient who is at immediate risk or in serious danger will be categorized as ESI level 1 or 2.

Table 6-3 offers guidance to triage nurses on using the ESI to evaluate febrile children and select the most suitable triage level. Fever is commonly defined as a rectal temperature above 38.0° C (100.4° F) (Baraff et al., 1993; ACEP, 2003). Infants younger than 28 days with a fever should be regarded as high risk and given at least an ESI level 2. For infants aged 28 days to 3 months, there are no definitive guidelines. The ESI research team advises triage nurses to follow their hospital’s local protocols. It is recommended that nurses consider assigning at least an ESI level 2 to these patients.

In version 4 of the ESI, we have adopted a different set of guidelines for managing fever in children aged 3 to 36 months. These guidelines focus on children with high fevers, defined as temperatures above 39.0° C (102.2° F) (ACEP, 2003). When evaluating a highly febrile child in this age group, the triage nurse should determine the child’s immunization status and whether there is a clear cause for the fever. If the child is not fully immunized or if no source for the fever can be identified, the child should be categorized as at least ESI level 3. However, if the child’s immunizations are current and there is an identifiable reason for the fever, an ESI level of 4 or 5 is suitable. For instance, a 7-month-old who is under pediatric care, has received the Haemophilus influenza type b (HIB) vaccine, and presents with a fever while tugging at his ear could be classified as ESI level 5.

##### Case Examples

The case studies below illustrate how vital signs information is utilized during ESI triage.

A healthy-appearing 28-year-old woman states, “My doctor said I’m around 6 weeks pregnant, and now I believe I might be having a miscarriage.” She reports, “I began spotting this morning and am now experiencing cramps.” She has no allergies or past medical history and is taking prenatal vitamins. Her vital signs are: temperature 98°F, heart rate 112, respiratory rate 22, and blood pressure 90/60.

This patient qualifies for an upgrade from level 3 to level 2 triage due to her vital signs. Her elevated heart rate and respiratory rate, along with low blood pressure, are worrisome. These symptoms may suggest internal hemorrhage caused by a ruptured ectopic pregnancy.

The mother of a 15-month-old reports that her baby has been experiencing diarrhea since the previous day. She mentions that everyone in the family has recently had the gastrointestinal virus that is circulating. The baby has shown reduced appetite, a mild fever, and several episodes of watery stools. The child is calmly sitting on the mother’s lap. The triage nurse observes indications of dehydration. There is no past medical history, no known drug allergies, and the baby is not on any medications. Vital signs are: temperature 100.4°F, heart rate 142, respiratory rate 48, and blood pressure 76/50.

This patient qualifies for at least ESI level 3. He will need laboratory tests and intravenous fluids as resources. Given his vital signs, the triage nurse may escalate him to ESI level 2. For an infant of this age, both heart rate and respiratory rate fall outside the normal range.

A 57-year-old woman states, “I need to see a doctor about my cough. I just can’t get rid of it. I barely slept last night because I was coughing so much, and now I’m extremely tired.” She mentions having a fever of 101° last night and is producing yellow sputum when she coughs. Her medical history includes a hysterectomy three years ago; she is not on any medications but is allergic to penicillin. Her vital signs are: temperature 101.4°, respiratory rate 28, heart rate 100, and oxygen saturation 90 percent.

At the start of her triage evaluation, this patient appears to possibly have pneumonia. She is likely to require two or more resources, but her low oxygen levels and rapid breathing are worrisome. Based on her vital signs, the triage nurse should upgrade her to an ESI level 2.

A 34-year-old obese woman arrives at triage with complaints of diffuse abdominal pain rated 6 out of 10, ongoing for the past two days. She reports multiple episodes of vomiting and notes that her last bowel movement was three days ago. Her medical history includes back surgery; she is not on any medications and has a peanut allergy. Her vital signs are: temperature 97.8°F, heart rate 104, respiratory rate 16, blood pressure 132/80, and oxygen saturation 99%.

This patient will require at least two resources, such as laboratory tests, IV fluids, possibly IV medication for nausea, and a CT scan. The triage nurse should assess the patient’s vital signs, paying attention to the heart rate. Although the heart rate is slightly outside the normal range for the patient’s age, this may be attributed to pain or physical activity. Therefore, the appropriate action is to categorize the patient as ESI level 3.

A crying 9-year-old arrives at triage with her mother after slipping on an icy sidewalk and hurting her right forearm. The forearm appears clearly deformed, but circulation, sensation, and movement are intact. According to her mother, the child has no allergies, is not on any medications, and is otherwise healthy. Her vital signs are: blood pressure 100/68, heart rate 124, respiratory rate 32, and oxygen saturation 99 percent.

The child is in pain from her fall and is clearly distressed. She will need at least two resources: an x-ray and an orthopedic consultation, and possibly conscious sedation. Although her heart rate and breathing are increased, the triage nurse can confidently assign her to ESI level 3. The changes in her vital signs are most likely caused by pain and emotional upset.

A 72-year-old woman arrives at the emergency department using nasal cannula oxygen for her severe COPD. She tells the triage nurse about an infected cat bite on her left hand, which appears red, swollen, and tender. She has no other health issues, uses albuterol as needed, and takes a daily aspirin. She has no known drug allergies. Her vital signs are: temperature 99.6°F, heart rate 88, respiratory rate 22, blood pressure 138/80, and oxygen saturation 91%. She reports no difficulty breathing.

This patient needs at least two resources: laboratory tests and intravenous antibiotics. She qualifies for ESI level 3. Although the triage nurse observes that her oxygen saturation and respiratory rate fall outside the normal adult range, the patient has advanced COPD. Therefore, these vital signs are not worrisome, and she will remain at ESI level 3 without being up-triaged.

##### Case Examples

The case studies below illustrate how vital signs information is utilized during ESI triage.

A healthy-appearing 28-year-old woman states, “My doctor said I’m approximately 6 weeks pregnant, and I believe I might be having a miscarriage.” She reports that she began spotting earlier today and is now experiencing cramping. She has no allergies or past medical history and is taking prenatal vitamins. Her vital signs are: temperature 98°F, heart rate 112, respiratory rate 22, and blood pressure 90/60.

This patient qualifies for an upgrade from level 3 to level 2 triage due to her vital signs. Her elevated heart rate and respiratory rate, along with low blood pressure, are worrisome. These symptoms may suggest internal hemorrhage caused by a ruptured ectopic pregnancy.

The mother of a 15-month-old reports that her baby has been experiencing diarrhea since the previous day. She mentions that everyone in the family has recently had the gastrointestinal virus that is circulating. The baby has shown reduced appetite, a mild fever, and several episodes of watery stools. The child is calmly sitting on the mother’s lap. The triage nurse observes indications of dehydration. There is no past medical history, no known drug allergies, and the baby is not on any medications. Vital signs are: temperature 100.4°F, heart rate 142, respiratory rate 48, and blood pressure 76/50.

This patient qualifies for at least ESI level 3. He will need laboratory tests and intravenous fluids as resources. Given his vital signs, the triage nurse may escalate him to ESI level 2. For an infant of this age, both heart rate and respiratory rate fall outside the normal range.

A 57-year-old woman states, “I need to see a doctor about my cough. I can’t seem to get rid of it. I barely slept last night because I was coughing so much, and now I’m extremely tired.” She mentions having a fever of 101° last night and is producing yellow sputum when she coughs. Her medical history includes a hysterectomy three years ago; she is not on any medications but is allergic to penicillin. Her vital signs are: temperature 101.4°, respiratory rate 28, heart rate 100, and oxygen saturation 90 percent.

At the start of her triage evaluation, this patient appears to possibly have pneumonia. She is likely to require two or more resources, but her low oxygen levels and rapid breathing are worrisome. Based on her vital signs, the triage nurse should upgrade her to an ESI level 2.

A 34-year-old obese woman arrives at triage with complaints of diffuse abdominal pain rated 6 out of 10, ongoing for the past two days. She reports multiple episodes of vomiting and notes that her last bowel movement was three days ago. Her medical history includes back surgery; she is not on any medications and has a peanut allergy. Her vital signs are: temperature 97.8°F, heart rate 104, respiratory rate 16, blood pressure 132/80, and oxygen saturation 99%.

This patient will require at least two resources, such as laboratory tests, intravenous fluids, possibly IV medication for nausea, and a CT scan. The triage nurse should assess the patient’s vital signs, paying attention to the heart rate. Although the heart rate is slightly outside the normal range for the patient’s age, this may be attributed to pain or physical activity. Therefore, the appropriate action is to categorize the patient as ESI level 3.

A crying 9-year-old arrives at triage with her mother after slipping on an icy sidewalk and hurting her right forearm. The forearm appears clearly deformed, but circulation, sensation, and movement are intact. According to her mother, the child has no allergies, is not on any medications, and is otherwise healthy. Her vital signs are: blood pressure 100/68, heart rate 124, respiratory rate 32, and oxygen saturation 99 percent.

The child is in pain from her fall and is clearly distressed. She will need at least two resources: an x-ray and an orthopedic consultation, and possibly conscious sedation. Although her heart rate and breathing are increased, the triage nurse can confidently assign her to ESI level 3. The changes in her vital signs are most likely caused by pain and emotional upset.

A 72-year-old woman arrives at the emergency department using nasal cannula oxygen for her advanced COPD. She tells the triage nurse that she has an infected cat bite on her left hand, which appears red, swollen, and tender. She has no other health issues, uses albuterol as needed, and takes daily aspirin. She has no known drug allergies. Her vital signs are: temperature 99.6°F, heart rate 88, respiratory rate 22, blood pressure 138/80, and oxygen saturation 91%. She reports no difficulty breathing.

This patient needs at least two resources: laboratory tests and intravenous antibiotics. She qualifies for ESI level 3. Although the triage nurse observes that her oxygen saturation and respiratory rate fall outside the normal adult range, the patient has advanced COPD. Therefore, these vital signs are not worrisome in her case, and she will remain at ESI level 3 without being up-triaged.

##### Conclusion

This chapter lays the groundwork for comprehending how vital signs are used within the Emergency Severity Index triage system. It also discusses the unique considerations for patients younger than 36 months. More research is needed to determine the most appropriate vital sign thresholds for emergency department triage. Additional studies will focus on pediatric patients arriving at the emergency department. We anticipate that future updates to the ESI will incorporate more evidence about how well triage vital signs predict outcomes for both pediatric and adult patients.

### Appendix A. Frequently Asked Questions

##### Chapter 3.

###### Frequently Asked Questions

1. Is it necessary to raise the triage level for an adult patient if their heart rate exceeds 100?

No, it is something to take into account.

2. Is it necessary to increase a patient’s triage level if their pain score is 7 out of 10 or higher?

No, this is just one aspect to take into account.

3. Should a patient who is chronically confused always be assigned to ESI level 2?

No, patients who experience a sudden alteration in their level of consciousness are classified as ESI level 2.

4. At what times should vital signs be measured?

For any patient classified as ESI level-3, vital signs are always taken if the triage nurse believes they could be helpful.

##### Chapter 4.

###### Frequently Asked Questions

1. Is it necessary to assign an ESI triage level of 2 to a 25-year-old woman who reports her pain as 10 out of 10 but is eating potato chips?

No. Since her vital signs are stable and she doesn’t meet any high-risk criteria, this patient should be categorized as ESI level 3. She will probably require lab tests and at least two resources, such as x-rays, an IV, or pain medication. Therefore, you should not allocate your last available bed to her.

Should an 80-year-old woman with ongoing confusion be assigned an ESI level 2 during triage?

No. The sudden appearance of confusion, lethargy, or disorientation qualifies for ESI level 2.

3. Shouldn’t a patient experiencing active chest pain be assigned an ESI level 1? After all, they ought to receive the highest priority.

Not every patient presenting with chest pain qualifies for ESI level-1. Patients who are unresponsive, without a pulse, not breathing, or in need of urgent life-saving measures fall under level-1. Those with chest pain who appear pale, sweaty, have low blood pressure, or slow heart rate and need rapid IV access to stabilize their condition are also considered level-1. Patients who are stable but experiencing ongoing chest pain generally meet high-risk criteria and should be assigned ESI level 2, with prompt placement arranged.

##### Chapter 5.

###### Frequently Asked Questions

1. Why isn’t teaching someone how to walk with crutches considered a resource?

Although teaching patients how to use crutches can take up a significant amount of the emergency department staff’s time, this instruction is frequently given to individuals with uncomplicated ankle sprains. These cases are generally categorized as ESI level 4 (ankle x-ray = one resource). Such patients are clearly less acute and require fewer resources compared to more complicated cases, such as those with tibia or fibula fractures, who are typically ESI level 3 (leg x-rays, orthopedic consultation, casting or splinting, IV pain management = two or more resources). Using a nursing resource intensity measure would more accurately capture the ED staff’s efforts involved in providing crutch-walking instruction.

2. Why doesn’t a splint qualify as a resource?

Using basic, pre-made splints (like those for ankle sprains) does not count as a resource. However, when ED staff create and apply splints, such as thumb spica splints for thumb fractures, this is considered a resource. To distinguish between patients with extremity injuries: those suspected of having fractures should be assigned ESI 3 (requiring two or more resources, such as x-rays, pain medication, and the creation and application of splints or casts), while patients who likely have simple sprains should be classified as ESI level 4.

3. Why is a saline or heparin lock not considered a resource?

In general, placing a heparin lock does not require much time from the emergency department staff. Nevertheless, most patients who receive heparin locks also need at least two additional resources, such as lab tests or IV medications, which typically results in them being categorized as ESI level 3 regardless.

Are all patients undergoing conscious sedation classified as ESI level 3 or above?

Conscious sedation is regarded as a complex procedure (requiring two resources) and is typically carried out on patients who are also undergoing laboratory tests, x-rays, or additional interventions like fracture reduction or dilation and curettage.

5. Are eye irrigation, administration of nebulized medications, and blood transfusions classified as resources?

All three are regarded as resources when assigning ESI triage ratings. These resources are typically utilized for more acute patients, demand considerable time from ED staff, and are likely to result in longer patient stays.

6. Do all patients with asthma fall under ESI level 4 since they need nebulized medication?

No. Asthma patients who are stable and only need nebulized medication are classified as ESI level 4. Some, however, experience severe respiratory distress and qualify for ESI level 2. Others fall in between, needing intravenous steroids or an x-ray along with nebulized treatments, and are categorized as ESI level 3. Lastly, those who just need a prescription refill for their inhaler are placed in ESI level 5, as they do not need any resources.

##### Chapter 6.

###### Frequently Asked Questions

Why is it unnecessary to obtain vital signs when triaging patients classified as ESI level 1 or 2?

Vital signs are not required to classify patients as life-threatening (ESI level 1) or high-risk (ESI level 2). Because patients at ESI levels 1 and 2 are in critical condition, the medical team must act promptly. Multiple interventions can take place at the same time, and vital signs may be obtained during the initial evaluation in the main acute section of the emergency department.

2. Why are vital signs not mandatory for patients classified as ESI level-4 and 5?

Vital signs are not required to classify patients as low or no resource (ESI level 4 or 5). Additionally, the pain, anxiety, and discomfort experienced during an emergency department visit can often affect a patient’s vital signs, which may normalize soon after the initial evaluation. However, if there are indications of abnormal symptoms—such as changes in skin color, mental status, dizziness, or sweating—a nurse may decide to check vital signs. If there are no physical signs suggesting the need for vital sign assessment, the patient can be directed to the main emergency department or an express care room.

3. What is the reason for taking vital signs on patients classified as ESI level-3?

Vital signs help distinguish between patients who require multiple resources and are stable (ESI level 3) and those who may be unstable or at higher risk (ESI level 2). Sometimes, patients classified as ESI level 3 may actually have unstable vital signs despite appearing stable. For ESI level-3 patients, checking vital signs acts as an important safety measure. Typically, ESI level-3 patients have more complex conditions and many end up being admitted to the hospital. Because they are not suitable for the fast-track area, these patients may have to wait longer for definitive care. They pose a particular challenge during triage, making it essential for caregivers to use vital signs to ensure the correct ESI level is assigned.

4. Why are temperatures always taken for pediatric patients under 36 months of age?

Temperature helps distinguish pediatric patients who require few or no resources (ESI level 4 or 5) from those likely to need multiple resources. In infants younger than three months, an abnormal temperature can suggest bacteremia and categorize the child as high-risk.

5. Why does the literature offer differing perspectives on the importance of vital signs in the triage process?

There is no conclusive evidence regarding the usefulness of vital signs in emergency department triage. Numerous elements can impact the reliability of vital sign measurements, which are somewhat dependent on the person performing the assessment. In certain situations, factors like long-term medication use (such as beta-blockers) can influence vital signs. Additionally, vital signs can serve to meet some public health responsibilities that emergency departments have. Finally, they are also useful for categorizing young pediatric patients into different groups.

6. Does JCAHO mandate that vital signs be taken during triage?

The Joint Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations does not explicitly set a standard for vital signs. However, it does state that physiological parameters should be evaluated based on the patient's condition.

7. Should the vital sign thresholds in the danger zone box be strictly enforced?

In everyday practice, surpassing the danger zone vital sign thresholds leads to up-triage being “considered” instead of being done automatically. The skilled triage nurse must rely on sound clinical judgment to assign the patient’s ESI level. This decision involves evaluating the patient’s vital signs, medical history, medications, and overall clinical presentation. Further research is necessary to assess how well vital signs predict outcomes during triage and to establish definitive criteria for up-triage.

8. What should be done if patients classified as ESI level-4 or 5 exhibit danger zone vital signs?

Although taking vital signs is not necessary to assign ESI levels 4 or 5, many patients may still have their vitals checked during triage if that is part of the emergency department’s standard procedures. According to the ESI triage guidelines, the triage nurse does not need to consider vital signs when determining if a patient qualifies for ESI level 5 (no resources needed) or ESI level 4 (one resource needed). Nevertheless, in real-world settings, a careful nurse will use clinical judgment and may factor in vital sign data when assigning the ESI level. For example, if a patient only wants a prescription refill, has no acute symptoms, and presents with a heart rate of 104 after walking to the ED, the nurse may still assign an ESI level 5. Conversely, if the same patient has a heart rate of 148 and it is irregular, the nurse should assign an ESI level 2. The triage nurse must also address situations such as elevated blood pressure in a patient otherwise classified as ESI level 4 or 5. If the patient has no symptoms related to the high blood pressure, the triage level should remain unchanged. Typically, elevated blood pressure in an asymptomatic patient will not be managed in the ED, but it is important to refer the patient to a primary care provider for further evaluation and long-term management.

# Emergency Severity Index, Version 4: Implementation Handbook

### Note from the Director

The Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality is proud to present the Emergency Severity Index, Version 4: Implementation Handbook. This guide details every aspect of the Emergency Severity Index (ESI), a five-level triage system used in emergency departments to categorize patients into five groups—ranging from 1 (most urgent) to 5 (least urgent)—based on the severity of their condition and the resources they require.

Following the creation of the ESI by emergency physicians Richard Wuerz and David Eitel in 1998 and successful pilot testing, the ESI Triage Group was established. Additional development of the ESI was supported by a grant from AHRQ. This group, made up of clinicians, managers, educators, and researchers, continued to improve the algorithm into its current form.

Aligned with our mission to enhance the quality, safety, efficiency, and effectiveness of health care for all Americans, AHRQ places a strong focus on training. Together with the included set of two DVDs, this handbook offers essential support to emergency department nurses, physicians, and administrators in establishing a thorough ESI educational program. The resources are based on ESI Version 4, which features updates to the algorithm, particularly expanding the criteria for ESI level 1 and refining the guidelines for pediatric fever.

An effectively executed ESI program enables hospital emergency departments to quickly recognize patients requiring urgent care, more accurately identify those who can be safely and efficiently treated in a fast-track or urgent care setting instead of the main ED, and better establish criteria for diverting ambulance patients away from the ED.

We hope this tool proves helpful as you continue working to enhance the quality of care in your emergency department.

### Chapter 2.Triage Acuity Systems

##### Standardization of Triage Acuity

Despite the fact that U.S. emergency departments (EDs) receive over 110 million visits annually (McCaig & Burt, 2004), there is a lack of comprehensive data on these visits at the local, regional, or national scale. This scarcity of information makes it challenging to address key questions such as “Which EDs treat the most critically ill patients?” and “What impact does patient acuity have on ED overcrowding?” As a result, there is increasing interest in developing standardized ED data systems in the United States to enhance clinical care, facilitate ED monitoring, enable benchmarking, and support research efforts (Barthell, Coonan, Finnell, Pollock, & Cochrane, 2004; Gilboy, Travers & Wuerz, 1999; Handler et al., 2004; National Center for Injury Prevention and Control).

A key data point in the emergency department is triage acuity, described by the Data Elements for Emergency Department Systems Task Force as the categorization of a patient's severity, indicating how much their condition threatens life or limb and if urgent intervention is required to relieve symptoms (NCIPC, 1997, p. 94).

There is significant inconsistency among emergency department triage acuity systems, especially in the United States (Emergency Nurses Association [ENA], 1997). Different systems use various terms for triage categories, and there is no universal agreement on the definitions for each level. Table 2-1 provides examples of acuity rating systems. Due to the absence of standardized triage acuity data in the U.S., it is understandable that the emergency department has been referred to as a “black box” of crucial public health information that remains mostly inaccessible in its current state (Martinez, 1995).

The Emergency Severity Index (ESI) is an innovative tool for assessing triage acuity in emergency departments. Research has demonstrated its consistency across various ED environments, including both urban and rural areas as well as academic and community hospitals (Eitel, Travers, Rosenau, Gilboy & Wuerz, 2003). With widespread adoption in U.S. emergency departments, the ESI could serve as a standard method for triage acuity assessment. This chapter outlines the traditional triage systems used in U.S. EDs and reviews the research related to those systems. It then provides a brief overview of newer triage approaches developed in Australia, Canada, and the United Kingdom. The chapter ends with an examination of studies on the ESI system and explores its potential advantages.

##### Triage Systems in the United States

Although numerous hospitals in the United States continue to utilize three- or four-level triage systems, there is a movement toward adopting five-level systems. The National Center for Health Statistics intends to substitute four-level triage data with five-level data in upcoming national benchmarking surveys of U.S. emergency departments. This change is driven by increasing evidence that five-level triage acuity data are more reliable and valid compared to three-level systems (personal communication, Linda McCaig, National Center for Health Statistics, October 6, 2004).

Both the ENA and the American College of Emergency Physicians (ACEP) have endorsed the use of five-level triage systems in U.S. emergency departments. In 2003, a joint task force from ENA and ACEP was formed to review the evidence regarding five-level triage systems, and their evaluation is still in progress. That same year, ACEP and ENA released a joint statement:

ACEP and ENA believe that patient care quality would improve by introducing a standardized triage scale and acuity classification system in emergency departments. Drawing on expert consensus and current evidence, ACEP and ENA endorse the use of a dependable, validated five-level triage scale (ACEP, 2003; ENA, 2003).

A 2005 task force paper recommended both the ESI and the Canadian Triage and Acuity Scale (CTAS) as reliable and valid triage methods (Fernandes et al., 2005). With increasing evidence favoring five-level triage systems, it is probable that a greater number of U.S. hospitals have adopted some version of this approach. The ENA intends to gather information on the types of triage systems used in U.S. hospitals in their forthcoming emergency department survey.

##### Research on Triage Systems in the United States

Research on triage acuity systems is increasing, with studies primarily examining two important aspects of triage nurses’ acuity ratings: reliability and validity (Pedhazur & Schmelkin, 1991; Waltz, Strickland & Lenz, 1991). Reliability refers to the consistency or level of agreement among users of a rating system. In the context of emergency department (ED) triage, two forms of reliability are relevant. Interrater reliability assesses whether two different nurses assign the same triage acuity level to the same patient, while intrarater reliability evaluates if the same nurse gives consistent acuity ratings to the same patient over time. Multiple studies in the United States have found that traditional three-level triage systems often have low interrater and intrarater reliability (Gill, Reese & Diamond, 1996; Travers, Waller, Bowling, Flowers & Tintinalli, 2002; Wuerz, Fernandes & Alarcon, 1998). For example, in one study, 305 triage assessments were analyzed after all triage nurses completed a required refresher course on the hospital’s three-level triage system (Travers et al., 2002). The initial ratings by the triage nurses were compared to retrospective ratings made by an expert panel of ED triage nurses, and the two groups agreed in only about half of the cases.

Validity refers to how accurately the rating system measures what it is supposed to measure. In the context of acuity ratings, validity indicates whether a label such as “nonurgent” truly reflects the absence of urgency in an emergency department patient’s condition. Assessing the validity of triage acuity has been challenging, and research studies have not reported on it.

In contrast to urine culture—which serves as the gold standard for accurately diagnosing urinary tract infections—there is no definitive gold standard for assessing the accuracy of triage acuity ratings in the conventional three-level triage system used in the United States. Nevertheless, surrogate indicators such as admission rates, resource use, and six-month mortality have been employed to evaluate five-level triage systems.

##### Triage Acuity Research on Five- Level Systems Abroad

Highly reliable and well-validated five-level triage systems have become the norm in other countries. Table 2-2 outlines three of these systems.

The Australasian Triage Scale (ATS), created in Australia, has been implemented across Australia and New Zealand since the early 1990s (Australasian College for Emergency Medicine, 1994, 2002; Cameron, Bradt & Ashby, 1996). The Australian Council on Healthcare Standards uses the ATS as the foundation for emergency department (ED) evaluation and quality assurance, with triage classifications regularly reviewed. Australian EDs are required to manage patients according to guidelines determined by their triage level. For instance, emergency cases must be attended to within 10 minutes, while nonurgent cases should be seen within 2 hours.

Several studies have assessed the validity and reliability of the ATS. Since there is no definitive gold standard for evaluating triage acuity, researchers have compared the five-level system to other illness severity scales and patient outcomes (Cameron et al., 1996; Cleary, Ashby, Jelinek & Lagaida, 1994; Erwich, Bond, Phillips, & Baggoley, 1997). Triage categories have shown strong correlations with disease- and population-specific measures, such as the Injury Severity Scales, trauma scores, and scales for cardiac, asthma, and pediatric patients. The ATS has also demonstrated a strong relationship with resource use and outcome indicators, including admission rates, emergency department length of stay, and mortality. Additionally, studies in which triage nurses assigned acuity levels to case scenarios have found that the ATS exhibits fair to moderate interrater reliability (Dilley & Standen, 1998; Jelinek & Little, 1996).

Five-level triage systems have been adopted in both the United Kingdom (U.K.) and Canada. In the U.K., the Manchester Triage Scale is utilized.

The system, developed in the U.K., uses a flow-chart presentation style (Manchester Triage Group, 1997). Nurses begin by determining the patient's main complaint, then select one of 52 flow charts to guide a structured interview and assign a triage category ranging from 1 (requiring immediate attention) to 5 (care needed within four hours). The Accident and Emergency Nurses Association has endorsed this system (Zimmermann, 2001). However, research on the Manchester system is limited. In one reliability study, triage assessments by nurses were retrospectively compared to those of senior medical staff, with only fair to moderate agreement found (Goodacre, Gillett, Harris & Houlihan, 1999).

The Canadian Triage and Acuity Scale (CTAS) was created by a team of Canadian emergency physicians (Beveridge & Ducharme, 1997; Canadian Association for Emergency Physicians [CAEP], 2002). Both the National Emergency Nurses' Affiliation, Inc. (NENA) and the Canadian Association for Emergency Physicians (CAEP) have recognized CTAS as the national benchmark for emergency department triage. Canadian hospitals are mandated to report data, including CTAS scores, for all emergency department visits to the Canadian government. Research has also demonstrated that the Canadian five-level scale provides strong interrater reliability when clinicians assess the severity of written scenarios based on real patient cases.

##### History of the Emergency Severity Index (ESI)

The Emergency Severity Index (ESI) is a five-level triage system created by emergency department physicians Richard Wuerz and David Eitel in the United States (Gilboy et al., 1999; Wuerz, Milne, Eitel, Travers & Gilboy, 2000). The founders believed that a key function of an emergency department triage tool is to help prioritize patients according to the urgency of their conditions. Triage nurses assess priority by asking, “Who should be seen first?” However, Drs. Wuerz and Eitel recognized that when multiple high-priority patients arrive at the same time, the question shifts to, “How long can each patient safely wait?” The ESI was designed based on a new approach to ED triage. Beyond determining which patient needs immediate attention, triage nurses using the ESI also evaluate what resources are required to move the patient toward an ED outcome. The ESI maintains the traditional focus on patient urgency, while also aiming to achieve a second objective: not only sorting patients, but also directing them to the appropriate resources, in the right place, and at the right time.

The initial version (v. 1) of the ESI was first used at two university-affiliated emergency departments in the spring of 1999. By fall 2000, the ESI was updated with input from emergency department clinicians to add triage criteria for pediatric patients, and this second version (v. 2) was then introduced in five more hospitals, including both non-university teaching and community hospitals. Feedback from nurses and physicians at these locations, combined with the best available scientific data, led to further improvements, resulting in version 3 (v. 3) in 2001 (Wuerz et al., 2001). More recent developments have produced additional updates to the tool, which is presented in this edition of the ESI handbook as version 4 (v. 4) (Tanabe et al., in press).

Emergency physicians and nurses in the United States and Canada have carried out multiple research studies evaluating the reliability and validity of the ESI. The ESI has been directly compared with traditional three-level triage systems as well as the five-level CTAS. These studies will be discussed later in the chapter. Similar to the Australasian, Canadian, and U.K. systems, the ESI triage system consists of five levels. However, it differs in both its conceptual framework and practical use. The triage systems from Australia, Canada, and the U.K. are based on the idea that triage is meant to determine how long a patient can safely wait for care in the emergency department, with specific definitions for the time to physician assessment included in their protocols. This is a key distinction between ESI and both CTAS and ATS, as ESI does not specify expected time frames for physician evaluation.

The ESI stands out because it requires the triage nurse to predict the resources a patient will need—such as diagnostic tests and procedures—in addition to assessing acuity, in order to assign a triage category for patients who are less critically ill. The ESI triage levels are shown in Figure 2-1. Later chapters will explain in detail how to categorize emergency department patients using the ESI. In summary, the process begins with evaluating acuity, focusing on the stability of the patient’s vital signs and the risk of immediate life or organ threat. For patients who are stable, the nurse then estimates the resources likely needed to reach a disposition in the emergency department, based on their experience. These resource needs can vary from none to two or more.

##### Research on the Emergency Severity Index

In a preliminary study evaluating ESI v.1 ratings for 493 triage cases at two Boston hospitals in 1998, researchers determined that the system was both reliable and valid (Wuerz et al., 2000). During the study, patients were triaged at the same time by the triage nurse using the standard three-level scale and by a research nurse applying the first version of the ESI. Afterwards, an investigator, who was unaware of the research nurse’s ESI rating, assigned an ESI level based solely on the written triage note. The triage levels showed a strong correlation with the resources utilized in the emergency department and with outcomes like hospital admission. Patients with higher acuity (ESI levels 1 and 2) required more resources and had a greater likelihood of being admitted compared to those with lower acuity (ESI levels 4 and 5). Agreement between the research nurse and the investigator was high, with 77 percent matching exactly and 22 percent differing by only one triage level.

Several studies have assessed the reliability of the ESI by using the kappa statistic to determine inter-rater agreement, where kappa values range from 0 (no agreement) to 1 (perfect agreement). At one of the original ESI sites, a time series design was employed to compare triage reliability using a three-level scale before and after the introduction of ESI v.1 (Travers et al., 2002). The reliability improved, with the weighted kappa increasing from 0.53 for the three-level system to 0.68 for the five-level ESI. Another study investigated the reliability and validity of ESI v.2 during and after its implementation in triage at seven hospitals in the northeast and southeast. Over 200 triage nurses participated in an ESI triage education program, where they rated 40 case studies using the ESI (Eitel et al., 2003). The findings showed substantial inter-rater reliability, with kappa values between 0.70 and 0.80. Additionally, 386 actual patient triage decisions were analyzed, revealing high inter-rater reliability with weighted kappas from 0.69 to 0.87. In a separate study conducted at an urban emergency department in the Midwest, researchers assessed the reliability of ESI v.3 for 403 real patient triages and found a kappa of 0.89 (Tanabe, Gimbel, Yarnold, Kyriacou & Adams, 2004).

Researchers from Canada and the United States have directly compared the inter-rater reliability of the ESI and CTAS in a randomized study (Worster et al., 2004). The study involved ten Canadian triage nurses who were experienced with CTAS. These nurses were randomly assigned to receive either ESI version 3 or CTAS refresher training, after which they evaluated 200 case studies using the respective triage system. Both groups demonstrated excellent inter-rater reliability, with kappa values of 0.89 for ESI and 0.91 for CTAS.

The effectiveness of the ESI has been assessed by analyzing outcomes in several thousand patients. Research has demonstrated consistent and strong associations between the ESI and factors such as hospitalization, emergency department length of stay, and mortality (Eitel et al., 2003; Tanabe et al., 2004; Wuerz, 2001; Wuerz et al., 2001). Additionally, the ESI has shown moderate correlations with physician evaluation and management codes, as well as nursing workload indicators (Travers et al., 2002). The ESI also enables meaningful comparisons of patient case mix across different hospitals. In one study, a stratified random sample of 200 patients was taken from each of the seven original ESI hospitals to compare case mix (Eitel et al., 2003). As anticipated, tertiary care centers had a greater proportion of high-acuity patients, while community hospitals had more patients requiring fewer resources.

A survey conducted among nursing staff at the two initial university teaching hospitals found that the response to the ESI implementation was favorable (Wuerz et al., 2001). Nurses indicated that the ESI was simpler to use and more effective for prioritizing patients for care compared to the previous three-level systems used at those locations.

In the latest ESI study, the accuracy of ESI level 2 was closely analyzed (Tanabe et al., in press). Reviewing the outcomes of 571 ESI level-2 patients across five hospitals, researchers discovered that 20 percent required immediate, life-saving treatment. The study’s authors suggested that these patients should be categorized as ESI level 1. The revised ESI version 4, discussed in later chapters of this book, incorporates changes informed by this recent research.

##### Benefits of the Emergency Severity Index

The ESI has been adopted by hospitals across various regions, including both university and community hospitals, as well as teaching and nonteaching facilities. Clinicians, managers, and researchers in these settings have recognized several advantages of ESI triage compared to traditional three-level systems. One key advantage is the ability to quickly identify patients who require immediate care. ESI triage emphasizes the efficient sorting of patients, especially when resources are limited. In some ways, ESI triage returns to the original intent of triage, as established during Napoleon’s era. It involves rapidly categorizing patients into five groups based on significant differences in anticipated resource needs, which correspond to different operational requirements. Utilizing ESI for this swift categorization can enhance patient flow through the emergency department. After an ESI triage level is determined, patients can be directed to further assessment, registration, initial treatment, or the waiting area, depending on their severity and expected resource use. For instance, patients classified as level 1 or 2 can be taken straight to the treatment area for prompt evaluation and care, while those at levels 4 and 5 may proceed to registration and then wait for an available bed.

A key concern separate from ESI triage is when to perform a full nursing assessment. Many experts suggest that a comprehensive assessment does not need to take place at the initial triage station, but can instead be completed in the main treatment area or a secondary triage area, depending on each patient’s needs and the current workload in the emergency department (Gilboy et al., 1999). At triage, only the evaluation necessary to assign an ESI level is required to help with the initial sorting of patients. Full clinical assessments are time-consuming, and performing them at triage can delay care and lower satisfaction for patients with less severe conditions. As patient numbers and case complexity rise, leading to ED crowding, it is important to rethink traditional care processes to improve efficiency and effectiveness. Nevertheless, it remains essential to gather enough information to accurately determine the appropriate triage category. This is particularly important when patients face long waits to see a physician, which is common with higher patient volumes. Triage has become even more vital as waiting room times increase. Assigning a patient to a lower triage category than appropriate can heighten the risk of poor outcomes due to longer waits.

Additional advantages of the ESI include its ability to identify patients who do not require care in the main emergency department and can instead be safely and more efficiently managed in a fast-track or urgent care setting. For instance, in many hospitals, triage guidelines specify that all ESI level 4 and 5 patients may be directed to either medical urgent care or minor trauma sections of the ED. The policy also permits certain level-3 patients, such as those needing straightforward migraine treatment, to be sent to urgent care. ESI level-3 patients assigned to urgent care, as well as any patients transferred from urgent care to the acute area for more serious issues, are tracked through the quality improvement program. Nurses using the ESI have noted that it improves communication about patient acuity compared to the previous three-level triage systems used at these facilities (Wuerz et al., 2001). For example, a triage nurse can say to the charge nurse, “I need a bed for a level 2 patient,” and this shared terminology allows the charge nurse to immediately understand the situation without requiring a detailed patient description.

The ESI has also served as the basis for emergency department policies targeting certain groups. For instance, at one location, the psychiatric team is required to provide consultations for level 2 and 3 patients within 30 minutes, and for level 4 and 5 patients within an hour of being notified. At another facility, the ESI is part of a policy for patients over 20 weeks pregnant who come to the ED. Patients assigned ESI levels 1 and 2 receive care in the ED by emergency medicine staff with an obstetric consultation, while those at levels 3, 4, or 5 are directed to the hospital’s labor and delivery unit.

The ESI is also an effective method for establishing thresholds for redirecting ambulance patients away from the ED. At Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston, the ED Diversion Policy and Guidelines define full capacity as all RN-staffed ED beds being occupied. The ESI is utilized to assess when the department is over capacity.

Studies have demonstrated that the ESI is a dependable and accurate method for assessing triage acuity. This system has been implemented in numerous emergency departments across various regions of the United States, including both academic and community hospitals. These institutions have shown that using the ESI enhances emergency department efficiency and patient outcomes. Broader use of the ESI in U.S. hospitals could help create a standardized approach to triage acuity assessment, supporting benchmarking, public health monitoring, and research efforts.

### Chapter 3. Introduction to the Emergency Severity Index

The Emergency Severity Index (ESI) is an easy-to-use, five-level triage tool that classifies emergency department patients by assessing both the severity of their condition and the resources they will require. The triage nurse first evaluates the patient’s acuity. If the patient does not qualify for the highest acuity levels (ESI level 1 or 2), the nurse then considers the anticipated resource needs to assign a triage level (ESI level 3, 4, or 5). Unlike other triage systems, the ESI uniquely incorporates resource requirements into its assessment. Acuity is judged based on the stability of vital signs and the risk to life, limb, or organ function. The nurse predicts resource needs by drawing on experience with patients who have had similar symptoms or injuries. Resource needs refer to the number of interventions or services a patient is likely to need before a decision about their care can be made. After becoming familiar with the ESI algorithm, the triage nurse can quickly and accurately assign patients to one of five clearly defined, non-overlapping categories. The ESI offers emergency departments a reliable and valid method for triage (Eitel et al., 2003; Travers et al., 2002; Wuerz et al., 2001; Tanabe et al., 2004).

This chapter offers a detailed, step-by-step guide to triaging using the ESI algorithm. Later chapters delve deeper into essential concepts and include many examples to illustrate the nuances of applying ESI.

Algorithms are commonly utilized in emergency care settings. Many emergency clinicians are acquainted with the algorithms taught in programs like Basic Life Support, Advanced Cardiac Life Support, and the Trauma Nursing Core Course. These programs offer a systematic, step-by-step method for making clinical decisions, which clinicians can master through repeated practice. At each stage, the algorithm guides the user on which questions to pose or what information to collect. Depending on the responses or data gathered, a decision is reached, and the algorithm leads the user to the subsequent step, eventually resulting in an outcome.

Using the ESI algorithm for triage requires an experienced emergency department nurse to begin at the top of the algorithm. Figure 3-1 provides a conceptual overview of the ESI algorithm, highlighting its key decision points. A more detailed explanation of the actual ESI algorithm is given later in the chapter (see Figure 3-1a). The algorithm involves four decision points (A, B, C, and D) to categorize patients into one of five triage levels (refer to Figure 3-1). With experience, the triage nurse will be able to quickly progress through each ESI decision point.

##### Decision Point A: Is the Patient Dying?

In simple terms, at decision point A (Figure 3-2), the triage nurse determines whether the patient is dying. If the response is “yes,” the triage process ends, and the patient is immediately assigned to ESI level 1. If the answer is “no,” the process continues to the next step in the algorithm, decision point B.

The question below helps assess if the patient is at risk of dying (conceptual algorithm): Does the patient need urgent life-saving treatment? The subsequent questions assist in evaluating whether the patient fulfills level-1 criteria:

Does the patient need urgent airway management, medication, or another hemodynamic intervention?

Does the patient exhibit any of the following: is already intubated, not breathing, without a pulse, experiencing severe respiratory distress, has an SpO2 below 90 percent, shows sudden changes in mental status, or is unresponsive?

Studies have shown that triage nurses can reliably anticipate when immediate interventions are necessary (Tanabe et al., in press). For ESI triage, Table 3-1 outlines which interventions are classified as life-saving and which are not.

Interventions that are not classified as life-saving may include certain diagnostic or therapeutic procedures, but do not involve actions that would directly “save a life.” Life-saving interventions focus on ensuring an open airway, sustaining breathing, or supporting circulation. The following questions may assist in assessing whether a patient needs a life-saving intervention.

Is this patient's airway open and unobstructed?

Is the patient showing signs of breathing?

Is the patient exhibiting a pulse?

Is the nurse worried about the pulse’s rate, rhythm, and strength?

Was this patient intubated before arriving at the hospital due to worries about their capacity to keep their airway open, breathe on their own, or sustain adequate oxygen levels?

Is the nurse worried about whether this patient can supply enough oxygen to their tissues?

An ESI level-1 patient arrives at the emergency department in a critical, unstable state. Immediate intervention is essential to prevent death, prompting a coordinated team response with the physician present at the bedside and nurses delivering intensive care. These patients receive immediate attention, as prompt treatment can influence their risk of complications or death.

A primary distinction between ESI level-1 and level-2 patients is the necessity for immediate physician involvement in patient care. Level-1 patients are in critical condition and need prompt evaluation and intervention by a physician. In contrast, although level-2 patients are also seriously ill, emergency nurses can begin treatment using established protocols without a physician present. The nurse identifies the need for interventions but is assured that the patient’s condition is stable enough not to worsen rapidly. The nurse can start intravenous lines, provide supplemental oxygen, perform an ECG, and connect the patient to a cardiac monitor before a physician is required at the bedside.

When assessing the necessity for urgent lifesaving measures, the triage nurse thoroughly examines the patient’s respiratory condition and oxygen saturation (SpO2) levels. Even if a patient is still breathing, severe respiratory distress or an SpO2 below 90 percent indicates a critical need for prompt action to secure the airway and ensure adequate oxygenation. Such a patient will need the physician present to administer medications for rapid sequence intubation or to initiate other airway and breathing interventions.

Patients experiencing chest pain should also be assessed according to the same standards. While some individuals with chest pain are quite stable and may only need a diagnostic ECG, they do not fulfill level-1 criteria. In contrast, those who appear pale, sweaty, are in acute respiratory distress, or are hemodynamically unstable will need urgent, life-saving treatment and do qualify for level-1 criteria. Every patient with chest pain must be evaluated against the level-1 criteria to decide if immediate life-saving intervention is necessary.

When deciding if a patient needs immediate life-saving care, the triage nurse must evaluate the patient’s level of consciousness. The ESI algorithm utilizes the AVPU scale (alert, verbal, pain, unresponsive) as shown in Table 3-2. This step aims to identify patients experiencing a sudden change in consciousness. The nurse should look for deviations from the patient’s baseline, with particular concern for those who were previously alert but are now categorized as P (pain) or U (unresponsive). Unresponsiveness should be considered in the context of sudden neurological changes, and not in patients with pre-existing developmental delays, documented dementia, or aphasia. Any patient who is unresponsive—including those who are intoxicated and do not respond to painful stimuli—meets level-1 criteria and requires immediate assessment. For instance, a patient with a sudden decrease in mental status who cannot maintain their airway or is experiencing severe respiratory distress would need urgent intervention.

Users familiar with ESI version 3 (v. 3) will observe a significant modification in the criteria for ESI level 1. The primary distinction between ESI v. 3 and ESI version 4 (v. 4) is the recognition and reclassification of some of the most critically ill patients, who were previously categorized as ESI level 2. Now, patients who need immediate life-saving interventions are assigned to ESI level 1. For example, under the previous version, a patient experiencing severe respiratory distress who needed intubation but was still breathing would have been placed in ESI level 2. In the current version, this patient now qualifies for level 1. Additional examples of patients now considered ESI level 1 include those who are weak and dizzy with a heart rate of 30 or 200. While this adjustment may not impact a large number of patients, it ensures that the most critically ill are classified correctly. Before v. 4, triage nurses often faced two types of ESI level-2 patients: those needing immediate attention and those who could safely wait a short period (about 10 minutes) without worsening. This issue prompted a large, multi-center, prospective study to determine which ESI level-2 patients actually received immediate interventions (Tanabe et al., in press). The findings from that study led to the revision of the ESI system. This updated ESI handbook outlines these changes and introduces ESI v. 4.

An ESI level-1 patient does not necessarily arrive at the emergency department by ambulance. Individuals with drug overdoses or acute alcohol intoxication might be left at the entrance, while children could be brought in by car and carried inside. A skilled triage nurse can quickly recognize these critically ill patients. With a swift visual assessment from a distance, the nurse identifies those in severe distress. These patients are promptly moved to the treatment area, where resuscitation begins immediately.

Patients classified as ESI level 1 make up about 1 to 3 percent of all emergency department cases (Eitel et al., 2003; Wuerz, Milne, Eitel, Travers & Gilboy, 2000; Wuerz et al., 2001). These patients require immediate resuscitation by either the emergency physician and nurse or the trauma or code team upon arrival. Research on ESI indicates that the majority of ESI level-1 patients are admitted to intensive care units, while some do not survive their time in the emergency department (Eitel et al., 2003; Wuerz, 2001). A small number of ESI level-1 patients are discharged from the ED if their altered level of consciousness or vital functions are reversible, as seen in cases such as hypoglycemia, seizures, alcohol intoxication, or anaphylaxis.

Illustrations of ESI level 1:

Heart stoppage.

Cessation of breathing.

Acute difficulty breathing.

Oxygen saturation below 90%.

Severely injured trauma patient arrives unresponsive.

Overdose presenting with a respiratory rate of 6.

Three general questions are utilized to assess if the patient satisfies level-2 criteria.

Is this considered a high-risk scenario?

2. Does the patient exhibit confusion, lethargy, or disorientation?

3. Is the patient experiencing significant pain or discomfort?

The triage nurse gathers relevant subjective and objective data to promptly address these questions. An overview of ESI level-2 criteria is provided here, with a more comprehensive discussion of patients qualifying for ESI level-2 to be covered in Chapter 4.

Severe breathing difficulty accompanied by agonal or gasping respirations.

Markedly slow or rapid heart rate accompanied by evidence of inadequate tissue perfusion.

Low blood pressure accompanied by indications of inadequate tissue perfusion.

A trauma patient in need of urgent resuscitation with crystalloids and colloids.

Experiencing chest pain, appearing pale and sweaty, with a blood pressure of 70 by palpation.

Feeling weak and dizzy, with a heart rate of 30.

Severe allergic response.

Infant exhibiting limpness.

Unconscious with a strong smell of alcohol.

Low blood sugar accompanied by altered mental state.

##### Decision Point B: Should the Patient Wait?

After the triage nurse establishes that the patient does not qualify for ESI level 1, they proceed to decision point B (refer to Figure 33). At this stage, the nurse must determine if the patient can safely wait to be evaluated. If waiting is not appropriate, the patient is assigned ESI level 2. If the patient can wait, the process continues to the following step in the algorithm.

###### Is This a High-risk Situation?

Drawing on a brief patient interview, general observations, and the intuition developed through experience, the triage nurse identifies patients at high risk. Often, factors such as the patient’s age and medical history play a role in this assessment. A high-risk patient is someone whose condition could quickly worsen or who shows symptoms indicating a need for urgent, time-sensitive care. This type of patient may face a significant threat to life or organ function. In most cases, a comprehensive physical exam or a complete set of vital signs is not necessary to recognize high risk. Instead, the patient may describe symptoms that an experienced triage nurse immediately recognizes as serious. For instance, a patient who says, “I never get headaches, but after lifting something heavy, I now have the worst headache of my life,” would be triaged as ESI level 2, as these symptoms could indicate a subarachnoid hemorrhage.

If a patient is classified as ESI level 2, the triage nurse has determined that it is not safe for them to wait in the waiting area for any period of time. Although ESI guidelines do not specify exact time frames, patients at ESI level 2 are a high priority and should typically be placed and begin receiving treatment within 10 minutes of their arrival. It is crucial to note that even though the criteria for level 1 have broadened in version 4 of the algorithm, ESI level 2 patients are still regarded as very ill and at significant risk. Immediate care is necessary, and a suitable bed must be located right away. In most cases, instead of proceeding to the next patient, the triage nurse recognizes the severity of the situation and promptly notifies the charge nurse or staff in the patient care area that there is an ESI level 2 patient.

Instances of high-risk scenarios:

Experiencing ongoing chest pain suggestive of coronary syndrome, but currently stable and not in need of urgent life-saving treatment.

A healthcare worker experiencing a needlestick injury.

Shows symptoms of a stroke, but does not fulfill level-1 requirements.

Ectopic pregnancy has been ruled out; the patient is hemodynamically stable.

A patient undergoing chemotherapy, and thus immunosuppressed, presenting with a fever.

A patient exhibiting suicidal or homicidal tendencies.

Chapter 4 provides further details about high-risk situations.

###### Is the Patient Confused, Lethargic, or Disoriented?

This is the second question to consider at decision point B. Once more, the focus is on determining if the patient is showing a sudden change in consciousness. Patients who are normally confused do not qualify for level-2 criteria.

Confused: Shows unsuitable reactions to stimuli, with reduced attention span and impaired memory.

Lethargic: Sleepy, spends more time sleeping than normal, but reacts properly when prompted.

Disoriented: The patient cannot accurately respond to questions regarding time, location, or identity.

Instances of patients who exhibit confusion, lethargy, or disorientation:

Recent development of confusion in an older adult.

A 3-month-old infant whose mother reports that the baby is sleeping constantly.

The teenager was discovered in a state of confusion and disorientation.

All of these examples suggest that the brain could be impaired either structurally or chemically.

###### Is This Patient in Severe Pain or Distress?

At decision point B, the triage nurse’s third question is whether the patient is experiencing pain or distress. If the answer is “no,” the nurse proceeds to the next step in the process. If the answer is “yes,” the nurse must evaluate the severity of the pain or distress. This assessment is based on clinical observation and/or the patient’s self-reported pain score of 7 or above on a 0 to 10 scale. When a patient reports pain at 7/10 or higher, the nurse may assign an ESI level 2, but this is not mandatory. Pain is a frequent reason for emergency department visits, and not all patients with pain scores of 7/10 or more require an ESI level-2 classification. For instance, a patient with a sprained ankle and pain rated at 8/10 would typically be considered ESI level 4. Assigning a level 2 rating based solely on pain is not necessary in such cases.

In certain patients, pain can be evaluated through clinical observation, such as noting distressed facial expressions, sweating, body posture, and alterations in vital signs. The triage nurse looks for physical signs of acute pain that validate the patient’s reported pain level. For instance, a patient with abdominal pain who is sweating, has a rapid heart rate, and elevated blood pressure, or a patient experiencing severe flank pain accompanied by vomiting, pale skin, and a history of kidney stones, are both clear examples of individuals who qualify for ESI level-2. More details about ESI level 2 and pain assessment can be found in Chapter 4.

Severe distress may be either physical or mental. Instances of distress include a victim of sexual assault, an aggressive patient, or a person with bipolar disorder experiencing a manic episode.

ESI level-2 patients represent a relatively small but high-risk segment, making up 20 to 30 percent of emergency department visits (Travers et al., 2002; Wuerz et al., 2001; Tanabe, Gimbel et al., 2004). After identifying an ESI level-2 patient, the triage nurse must ensure prompt care. Registration can be handled by a family member or completed at the bedside. These patients require vital signs and a thorough nursing assessment, though this does not have to occur during triage. Their placement should not be postponed to complete vital sign collection. Studies on ESI indicate that 50 to 60 percent of ESI level-2 patients are admitted from the emergency department (Wuerz et al., 2001).

##### Decision Point C: Resource Needs

If the responses to the first two decision points are “no,” the triage nurse proceeds to decision point C (refer to Figure 3-4). At this stage, the nurse should inquire, “How many different resources will this patient likely require for the physician to make a disposition decision?” The possible dispositions include discharging the patient home, admitting them to the observation unit or hospital, or transferring them to another facility. This step again calls for the triage nurse to rely on previous experience with similar emergency department cases. It is important for ED nurses to recognize that estimating resource needs is based on standards of care and is not influenced by the hospital’s type (teaching or non-teaching) or its location. Any patient arriving at an emergency department should generally utilize the same resources to reach a disposition. Taking into account the patient’s brief subjective and objective evaluation, medical history, allergies, medications, age, and gender, the nurse must determine how many different resources will be necessary for the physician to decide on a disposition. Essentially, what is the standard approach for a patient presenting with this common complaint in the ED? The triage nurse should make this judgment based on their assessment of the patient, focusing on the usual practices in that specific emergency department, rather than on individual provider preferences.

To determine what resources are needed, the triage nurse should understand the standards of care in the emergency department. The nurse must also be aware of the idea of “prudent and customary.” An effective way to approach this is to consider, “Based on this patient’s main complaint or injury, what resources will the emergency physician probably use?” Resources may include hospital services, diagnostic tests, procedures, consultations, or interventions that go beyond the physician’s history and physical exam, as well as basic emergency department actions like applying a bandage. Additional details and examples can be found in Chapter 5.

Table 3-3 outlines which items are classified as resources and which are not for ESI triage purposes. Patients at ESI level 3 are expected to need two or more resources, those at ESI level 4 are anticipated to need one resource, and ESI level 5 patients are expected to need none, as shown in Table 3-4.

Studies indicate that ESI level-3 patients account for 30% to 40% of those treated in the emergency department (Eitel et al., 2003; Wuerz et al., 2001). These individuals typically need more comprehensive assessments but are considered stable in the short term, which can result in longer ED stays. ESI level 4 and 5 patients represent 20% to 35% of emergency department visits, and this percentage may be higher in areas with limited access to primary care. Properly trained mid-level providers with suitable skill sets could manage these patients in fast-track or express care units, especially since many present with trauma-related issues. Given their stable condition, it is safe for these patients to wait several hours before being seen.

##### Decision Point D:The Patient's Vital Signs

Prior to assigning a patient to ESI level 3, the nurse must review the patient’s vital signs to determine if they fall outside the normal range for the patient’s age and if these abnormalities are clinically significant. If the vital signs are abnormal, the triage nurse should consider elevating the triage level to ESI level 2. Ultimately, it is up to the triage nurse to decide whether the patient should be upgraded to ESI level 2 due to abnormal vital signs. This is referred to as decision point D.

Vital sign parameters vary by age (refer to Figure 3-5). The vital signs assessed include pulse, respiratory rate, and oxygen saturation, with body temperature also considered for children under three years old. Based on these criteria, a triage nurse may choose to upgrade an adult patient with a heart rate of 104, or keep them at ESI level 3. Similarly, a 6-month-old infant with a cold and a respiratory rate of 48 might be assigned to ESI level 2 or 3. The nurse must determine, using the patient’s history and physical exam, whether the vital signs indicate a high-risk situation that requires immediate attention. Chapter 6 provides a detailed discussion of vital signs and includes examples.

Temperature is considered only for children younger than three years old. A high fever may prevent young children from being placed in categories 4 and 5. This approach helps to identify children who may have bacteremia and ensures they are not directed to a fast track area or made to wait for an extended period. Detailed pediatric fever guidelines will be provided in Chapter 6.

###### Does Time to Treatment Influence ESI Triage Categories?

Estimating how long a patient can wait before being seen by a doctor is a key part of most triage systems. The Australasian and Canadian Triage Systems specify that patients must be evaluated by a physician within a set timeframe according to their triage level. In contrast, the ESI does not set exact time requirements for physician assessment. Nonetheless, patients classified as ESI level 2 should receive prompt attention, though each institution decides its own policy. Often, there is confusion between institutional policies, the actual flow of patient care, and the ESI triage level.

We will present four patient cases where there may appear to be a contradiction between patient flow and triage category. Trauma patients often arrive at triage after experiencing a significant injury mechanism, such as being an unrestrained passenger in a high-speed car accident. Sometimes, these patients do not arrive by ambulance but come to triage on their own, reporting localized right upper quadrant pain and having stable vital signs. Although this patient is physiologically stable, walked into the emergency department, and does not meet ESI level-1 criteria, they are still at high risk for injuries like a liver laceration and other serious trauma, so they should be assigned ESI level 2. Many emergency departments have trauma protocols and trauma response levels that require prompt initiation of care. Both triage level and trauma response level are important and should be documented as separate scores. While the triage nurse correctly identifies this as a physiologically stable trauma patient and assigns ESI level 2, she should also ensure the patient is placed and managed according to trauma policy. The patient is likely stable for at least another 10 minutes and does not need immediate life-saving measures. However, if the same patient arrived with a palpable blood pressure of 80, they would be classified as ESI level 1 and would need urgent, life-saving hemodynamic interventions.

Another instance of policies influencing triage levels involves patients presenting with stable chest pain. If a patient is physiologically stable but has chest pain that could indicate an acute coronary syndrome, they qualify for ESI level-2. These patients do not need immediate life-saving measures but are considered high-risk. Their treatment is time-sensitive, and an ECG should be completed within 10 minutes of arrival. Many emergency departments have protocols to ensure rapid ECG initiation. Although prompt care is necessary, the ECG serves as a diagnostic tool rather than a life-saving intervention. If all chest pain patients were assigned ESI level-1, it would hinder the ability to prioritize those who truly need immediate life-saving care. However, a chest pain patient who arrives at triage sweating and with a palpable blood pressure of 80 would meet ESI level-1 criteria.

The third instance of urgent care involves patients showing symptoms of an acute stroke. If the patient is physiologically stable, a delay of 10 minutes before starting treatment is unlikely to worsen their condition. However, a stroke patient who cannot maintain their airway qualifies for ESI level 1.

In another scenario, an elderly patient who has fallen and may have a hip fracture arrives with family by private car and is experiencing significant pain. Although the patient does not strictly qualify for ESI level 2, they are clearly uncomfortable. The triage nurse would assign an ESI level 3 and likely prioritize placing the patient in a bed ahead of other ESI level 3 cases. Similar situations can occur with patients arriving by ambulance. However, arriving by ambulance alone does not justify assigning ESI level 1 or 2. Triage level should always be determined using ESI criteria, regardless of how the patient arrived.

Overall, care for ESI level-2 patients should be expedited, with the goal of placing them in the treatment area within 10 minutes. It is crucial to note that although ESI version 4 has broadened level-1 criteria to include patients needing immediate interventions who were previously classified as level 2, all level-2 patients remain potentially very ill and need prompt assessment and care. The triage nurse has determined that it is unsafe for these patients to wait. While they may appear stable at present, their condition could quickly worsen, and timely diagnostic or therapeutic interventions may be critical (for example, a stable patient with chest pain should receive an ECG within 10 minutes of arrival), or they may face a possible major threat to life or organ function. ESI level-2 patients are still regarded as being at very high risk.

Given the current issue of ED overcrowding, it is common for triage nurses to encounter multiple ESI level-2 patients when there are no available ED beds. In these circumstances, there may be a temptation to “undertriage,” which can result in significant harm to patients and inaccurately reflect the ED’s patient population. When several ESI level-2 patients present at the same time, the triage nurse should assess each one using the ESI algorithm. This allows the nurse to prioritize among the level-2 patients, identifying those at greatest risk to guide decisions about patient placement.

##### Summary

In conclusion, the ESI is a straightforward five-level triage system that categorizes patients according to the severity of their condition and the resources they require. The ESI triage process relies on four main decision points. With this system, an experienced emergency department nurse can quickly and accurately assess and triage patients.

### Chapter 4. ESI Level 2

This chapter builds upon the initial overview of the ESI, emphasizing the importance of the experienced ED nurse’s clinical judgment. The ESI triage training program should allocate significant time to clarifying which patients qualify for ESI level 2. Here, we focus on typical patient scenarios that fulfill the criteria for ESI level 2.

Once the triage nurse has established that the patient does not need urgent life-saving care, the next step is to assess whether the patient can wait. In making this judgment, the triage nurse should ask, “Would I allocate my last available bed to this patient?” The three questions outlined in Figure 4-1 must be addressed, as they are essential elements of the ESI level-2 criteria.

Is this considered a high-risk scenario?

Is the patient showing signs of recent confusion, drowsiness, or disorientation?

3. Is the patient in significant pain or discomfort?

The rest of this chapter explores the decision-making aspects of ESI level 2 in depth. Numerous examples are included, illustrating potential medical diagnoses linked to patients’ chief complaints and symptoms. An experienced triage nurse will consistently evaluate the patient’s chief complaint, observed signs and symptoms, demographic information, and medical history to recognize high-risk situations. Although the goal of nurse triage is not to establish a medical diagnosis, these scenarios rely on the triage nurse’s expertise regarding possible diagnoses related to specific complaints. Comprehensive resources on the signs and symptoms of various medical conditions include the Emergency Nursing Core Curriculum[©] and other emergency nursing reference books. The following section highlights selected examples of high-risk situations, though it is not meant to be all-inclusive. These examples are summarized in Table 4-1.

##### High-risk Situations

Recognizing high-risk situations is essential in the triage decision-making process, no matter which triage system is applied. The ESI emphasizes the significance of identifying high-risk cases and relies on the triage nurse’s knowledge and experience to determine which patients are at increased risk.

There is limited literature on how emergency department (ED) triage nurses make decisions. While knowledge and experience are essential, they are not enough on their own. Another crucial element is intuition or a “sixth sense.” Novice triage nurses should be taught practical guidelines, or rules of thumb, to rely on until they gain the confidence and experience needed to make quick, accurate judgments. Examples of such guidelines include “assume all women of childbearing age are pregnant until proven otherwise” or “consider all chest pain as cardiac in origin until proven otherwise.” New triage nurses are also instructed in recognizing symptom clusters, such as the cardiac cluster of chest pain, nausea, shortness of breath, and sweating. Through previous clinical experiences, ED nurses develop what are called clinical portraits—memories of specific patient cases they have encountered. For instance, a nurse will always recall a patient with fever, stiff neck, and a meningococcal rash when seeing a similar case in triage. With each triage situation, nurses must draw upon all their accumulated knowledge and experience. Experienced triage nurses should be able to easily recognize high-risk situations.

Vital signs alone are often insufficient for identifying patients at high risk. Patients usually arrive at the emergency department with a main complaint, symptoms, or a history that points to a potentially serious issue that can quickly worsen if not addressed immediately. Factors such as the patient’s age, medical history, and current medications often affect how severe the main complaint appears. For instance, an elderly, frail patient with intense abdominal pain faces a much greater risk of complications or death compared to a healthy 20-year-old. The older patient with abdominal pain should be assigned an ESI level 2, while the younger adult with stable vital signs is generally categorized as ESI level 3. Triage nurses frequently recognize high-risk cases, which may then be supported by abnormal vital signs. For example, a patient reporting fever and a productive cough might have a respiratory rate of 32 and an oxygen saturation of 90 percent. An experienced triage nurse can use their knowledge to determine that this patient likely has pneumonia, is at risk for further oxygen desaturation, and should be considered high risk. In contrast, less experienced emergency department nurses may lack the necessary skills to reliably identify high-risk situations and make correct triage decisions. As a result, an inexperienced triage nurse can be a liability, regardless of the triage system in place. They have not yet developed the ability to use symptom patterns, clinical scenarios, or intuition—essential tools for recognizing high-risk patients. The following section will outline specific examples of high-risk situations.

###### Abdominal and Gastrointestinal

Abdominal pain is a common reason for visits to the emergency department. What factors make it high risk? Taking a thorough history and evaluating the current pain level, respiratory rate, and heart rate are key components that help identify high-risk cases. Pain severity is just one aspect to consider. If severe abdominal pain is accompanied by tachycardia or respiratory distress, this may indicate shock and puts the patient at higher risk. Elderly patients with severe abdominal pain are also at increased risk, as they are more likely to suffer from bowel obstructions, gastrointestinal bleeding, and other abdominal issues that carry greater morbidity and mortality compared to younger individuals. It is crucial to look for signs and symptoms of an acute abdomen in all patients presenting with abdominal pain. Important questions include: How long has the pain been present? What prompted the patient to seek emergency care today? Has the patient experienced severe nausea, vomiting, or diarrhea? Is there evidence of dehydration? Patients who report severe, “tearing” abdominal pain that radiates to the back should be evaluated for a possible abdominal aortic aneurysm. This pain is typically described as intense, constant, and of sudden onset, and these patients may have a history of hypertension.

Patients presenting with abdominal pain are frequently assigned an ESI level 3 at the start of the triage assessment, but if tachycardia or additional risk factors are identified, the triage nurse may reassess and classify the patient as high risk.

Vomiting blood or presenting with blood per rectum requires careful assessment, taking vital signs into account. A 30-year-old with bright red rectal bleeding, stable vital signs, and no additional risk factors does not qualify for ESI level 2. However, an older adult who called emergency services due to vomiting blood and has a heart rate of 117 and a respiratory rate of 24 is considered high risk and does meet the criteria for ESI level 2.

###### Cardiovascular

Chest pain is a frequent reason for seeking medical care. The symptoms of acute coronary syndromes (ACS) can be vague, making it challenging to assess ACS risk during triage. Patients experiencing chest or upper abdominal discomfort, with or without other symptoms, generally require a prompt ECG to check for ACS and should be considered high risk—classified as ESI level 2. Triage nurses must be aware of how heart disease can present differently, especially in women. For instance, a 54-year-old obese woman arriving at the emergency department with upper abdominal pain and fatigue is at risk for ACS and should be assigned to ESI level 2 as high risk. Patients with chest pain who are unstable and need immediate interventions like intubation or circulatory support should be triaged as ESI level 1. Not all patients with chest pain fall into level 1 or 2 categories; for example, a healthy 20-year-old with chest pain, cough, and a fever of 101°F is at low risk for ACS and does not meet ESI level 1 or 2 criteria. Each case should be evaluated individually. Other high-risk cardiovascular conditions include possible hypertensive emergencies, acute arterial blockages, and patients with fever following valve replacement surgery.

###### Dental, Ear, Nose, and Throat

While less frequent, epiglottitis still occurs and poses a possible threat to the airway. Patients with peritonsillar abscesses also face potential airway compromise, and both conditions are considered high-risk. If a patient with either issue is at immediate risk of airway obstruction and needs urgent intervention, they meet level-1 criteria. For those presenting with epistaxis, the triage nurse should check blood pressure, even though this step is not included in the ESI algorithm. Causes of epistaxis may include a posterior nosebleed from a hypertensive crisis, nose picking in a patient taking Coumadin®, or recent cocaine use. Regardless of the cause, these patients should be assigned ESI level 2, as they are considered high-risk.

###### Environmental

Individuals with inhalation injuries are at elevated risk for possible airway obstruction. If a patient exhibits marked airway distress necessitating urgent intervention, they qualify for level-1 criteria.

###### Facial

Individuals who have sustained facial trauma need to be assessed for potential facial fractures. Such fractures frequently occur alongside other serious injuries and can result in airway obstruction, making them high-risk cases that require urgent attention. If facial trauma has already caused airway compromise, the patient should be assigned an ESI level 1 to prioritize airway intervention. If there is a significant risk of airway compromise, the patient should be triaged as ESI level 2.

###### General Medical

A number of other general medical issues should be evaluated for potential high-risk scenarios. These complications include diabetic ketoacidosis, abnormal blood sugar levels (either high or low), sepsis, episodes of fainting or near-fainting, and various electrolyte imbalances that may require urgent intervention. Hyperkalemia, in particular, poses a significant risk as it can cause dangerous heart rhythm disturbances. This condition should be considered in dialysis patients who present with weakness. Additionally, cancer patients receiving chemotherapy who develop a fever are at increased risk for sepsis and must be recognized as high-risk and assessed promptly.

###### Genitourinary

Men experiencing testicular torsion typically report intense pain, are readily identifiable, and need prompt assessment, surgical treatment, and immediate pain management. Patients on renal dialysis who are unable to finish their treatment also represent a high-risk genitourinary emergency due to the potential for multiple electrolyte imbalances. Both women and, more frequently, men may arrive at triage with sudden urinary retention. Men over 65 often present with benign prostatic hypertrophy leading to an inability to urinate. Both genders may also be unable to void following surgery. These individuals are in significant distress and require urgent urinary catheterization. Such cases involve patients in severe discomfort who should be assigned an ESI level 2.

###### Mental Health

Patients presenting with mental health issues are considered high risk if they pose a threat to themselves, others, or their surroundings. Individuals who are suicidal, homicidal, psychotic, violent, or at risk of fleeing should be classified as high risk. Intoxication alone, without evidence of trauma or risk of aspiration, does not qualify as high risk. However, intoxicated patients should be thoroughly evaluated for trauma or behavioral concerns linked to alcohol use or their medical history, as either could indicate a high-risk scenario, warranting an ESI level 2 classification.

###### Neurological

Patients experiencing severe headaches along with changes in mental status, elevated blood pressure, lethargy, fever, or a rash should be regarded as high risk. Additionally, any individual who suddenly develops speech difficulties or motor weakness should be categorized as ESI level 2. These symptoms may indicate an acute stroke, making prompt assessment essential. The time since symptom onset is a key consideration in selecting treatment options, especially for fibrinolytic or other interventions. If a patient with no prior history of headaches arrives at the emergency department with a sudden headache, they should be considered at high risk for a subarachnoid hemorrhage. Such patients often recall the exact activity they were engaged in when the headache started, commonly after lifting, straining during a bowel movement, or following sexual activity.

###### Obstetrical and Gynecological

Women presenting with abdominal pain or vaginal bleeding should be thoroughly evaluated, and vital signs should be checked unless there is an immediate life-threatening condition. It is essential to obtain a pregnancy history and determine the date of the last menstrual period for all women of reproductive age. The triage nurse should look for symptoms of abruptio placentae and placenta previa in women who are in late pregnancy. For those in early pregnancy, assessment should include signs of ectopic pregnancy and spontaneous abortion. Pregnant patients who are between 14 and 20 weeks gestation or further along should be promptly evaluated by a physician, following the specific guidelines of the institution. Postpartum women who report heavy vaginal bleeding should also receive urgent medical attention from a physician. Any woman, whether pregnant or postpartum, who exhibits significant hemodynamic instability and requires immediate life-saving measures should be assigned an ESI level 1 during triage.

###### Ocular

Patients who experience eye trauma, sudden partial or complete vision loss, or chemical exposure to the eye are at significant risk for lasting eye damage and should be assigned to ESI level 2 triage. Visual loss can be caused by conditions such as central retinal artery occlusion, acute narrow-angle glaucoma, and retinal detachment. Eye injuries may lead to globe rupture or hyphema. Chemical exposures, especially from alkali substances, require prompt irrigation to minimize corneal injury. Each of these situations demands urgent assessment and intervention to avoid further harm or worsening of the condition. These cases fulfill the requirements for ESI level 2. Although immediate eye irrigation is critical, it is not classified as a life-saving measure, so these patients do not qualify for ESI level 1.

###### Orthopedic

Patients exhibiting signs and symptoms of compartment syndrome face a significant risk of losing the affected limb and should be categorized as ESI level 2. Other orthopedic injuries considered high-risk include any limb injury with impaired neurovascular status, partial or complete amputations, or injuries resulting from mechanisms known to be high-risk, such as severe acceleration or deceleration. Individuals with suspected fractures of the pelvis, femur, or hip, as well as other limb dislocations, require thorough assessment and monitoring of vital signs. These types of fractures may lead to substantial blood loss. If a patient is hemodynamically unstable and requires immediate life-saving intervention, they should be classified as ESI level 1.

###### Pediatrics

Triage nurses often feel uneasy when determining the acuity level for pediatric patients, particularly infants. Gathering a precise history from the caregiver and assessing the child’s activity are crucial steps. A child who cannot be comforted or who appears withdrawn may be at significant risk for severe illness. The situations below illustrate examples of high-risk conditions in children:

Convulsions.

Severe dehydration and sepsis.

Ketoacidosis caused by diabetes.

Burns resulting from child abuse.

Injury to the head.

Overdoses or ingestion of vitamins, iron, or other substances.

An infant younger than 28 days old who has a temperature of 100.4° F (38° C) or higher.

###### Transplant

Patients who have undergone organ transplantation are typically unwell and classified as high risk. They may develop organ rejection, sepsis, or other complications. Individuals awaiting transplantation are also generally regarded as high risk.

###### Respiratory

Numerous respiratory issues can put patients at significant risk. Those experiencing mild to moderate distress should undergo further assessment of their respiratory rate and pulse oximetry to decide if they should be classified as ESI level 2. Patients who are in severe respiratory distress and need immediate life-saving measures, such as intubation, qualify for level 1. A high-risk patient is someone who is currently breathing and oxygenating sufficiently but is in respiratory distress and could quickly worsen. Causes of respiratory distress may include asthma, pulmonary embolism, pleural effusion, pneumothorax, inhalation of toxic smoke, foreign body aspiration, or shortness of breath related to chest pain.

###### Toxicological

The majority of patients presenting with an overdose require prompt assessment, as these cases are considered high risk. Identifying the specific substances ingested and their amounts is frequently challenging. If the overdose was intentional and the patient expresses suicidal thoughts, this also qualifies as a high-risk scenario. Patients who arrive without breathing or need urgent lifesaving measures should be assigned ESI level 1, while all other admitted overdose cases should be classified as ESI level 2.

###### Trauma

Patients who have experienced a traumatic event are often at significant risk for injury, even if no visible injuries are present. Any injury mechanism that carries a high risk should be classified as ESI level 2, unless the patient has unstable vital signs and needs immediate intervention, in which case they should be assigned ESI level 1. Serious injuries occur due to the transfer of mechanical or kinetic energy, typically from acceleration, deceleration, or both. Examples include motor vehicle and motorcycle accidents, falls, and gunshot or stab wounds, all of which involve blunt or penetrating trauma and require thorough assessment for possible severe injury. The triage nurse should gather information such as the patient’s age, any pre-existing medical conditions, environmental factors, the height of a fall or jump, the speed of the vehicle involved, any history of loss of consciousness, the site of a penetrating injury, and the type of weapon used. The nurse will use their understanding of biomechanics and injury mechanisms to evaluate the patient and determine if they meet ESI level 2 criteria. Gunshot wounds to the head, neck, chest, or groin generally necessitate trauma team involvement and immediate care, and should be triaged as ESI level 1.

###### Wound Management

What factors classify a wound as high risk? Is there ongoing, uncontrolled bleeding? Is there evidence of arterial bleeding? Does the injury involve a partial amputation? How did the wound occur, and does the cause put the patient at increased risk for additional traumatic issues? The majority of wounds do not qualify for ESI level 2. For example, a patient with a stab wound to the thigh that only affects the subcutaneous tissue, has bleeding under control, and maintains normal neurological function below the injury can be assigned to ESI level 4. However, any wound with uncontrolled bleeding that demands immediate, lifesaving action to stabilize the patient falls under level 1 criteria.

##### Confusion/Lethargy/ Disorientation

The second consideration when assessing if a patient qualifies for level-2 criteria is whether they are experiencing new confusion, lethargy, or disorientation. Changes in mental status are a common reason for seeking care. Patients with these symptoms are often brought to the emergency department by relatives, friends, or emergency personnel. At decision point B in the ESI algorithm, confusion, lethargy, or disorientation refers specifically to a recent or sudden change in consciousness. Ongoing dementia or chronic confusion does not satisfy the requirements for ESI level 2. Acute confusion, lethargy, or disorientation can result from several serious medical issues, such as stroke, transient ischemic attack, other brain structural abnormalities, metabolic or electrolyte disturbances like hypoglycemia or hyponatremia, and toxicological problems.

This part of the algorithm is typically straightforward and offers minimal room for misinterpretation. When a patient arrives at triage with an unknown medical history and is confused, lethargic, or disoriented, the triage nurse should presume these symptoms are new and assign the patient to ESI level 2. However, if the patient exhibits new confusion, lethargy, or disorientation and needs an immediate life-saving intervention as outlined earlier, they should be categorized as ESI level 1.

##### Severe Pain/Distress

The last consideration in deciding if the patient qualifies for level-2 criteria is whether they are experiencing severe pain or distress. The patient must be evaluated for signs of significant pain or distress. Any patient reporting a pain score of 7 out of 10 or higher should be evaluated for ESI level-2 eligibility.

The word "considered" holds significant importance. It is ultimately the triage nurse’s judgment to decide if the combination of the patient’s clinical condition and reported pain level justifies assigning an ESI level 2. For instance, a patient whose toe was struck by a heavy metal object might report their pain as 10 out of 10. The patient could indeed have a fracture and be in intense pain, and may not have attempted any pain relief before arriving at the emergency department. In this scenario, the appropriate triage level would be ESI level 4, as only one resource—an x-ray—will be required. The triage nurse should provide comfort measures at triage, such as applying ice, elevating the foot, and administering pain medication if protocols allow, to help alleviate the pain. The nurse should accept the patient’s report of severe pain and address it during triage. Nevertheless, this patient can safely wait to be seen and should not be prioritized for the last available bed. In conclusion, the triage nurse evaluates not just the patient’s reported pain score, but also considers the main complaint, medical history, and the patient’s physical presentation when assigning a triage level. Patients for whom severe pain could justify an ESI level 2 rating include:

A patient experiencing severe (10/10) flank pain and visibly writhing during triage.

An 80-year-old woman experiencing generalized abdominal pain rated 7 out of 10, accompanied by intense nausea.

A 30-year-old individual experiencing an acute pain crisis due to sickle cell disease.

A cancer patient experiencing intense pain.

Any burn, whether full-thickness or partial-thickness, that necessitates prompt pain management.

All emergency department patients should be evaluated for pain and asked to rate their pain using a tool like the visual analog scale. Many triage nurses feel uneasy about recording a patient’s pain score and then having the patient wait to be seen. It is crucial for triage nurses to recognize that a patient’s self-reported pain score is just one aspect of the overall pain assessment. For instance, triage nurses often encounter patients who appear comfortable—such as laughing, talking on the phone, or eating—yet claim their pain is 10 or higher. Triage nurses should assign an ESI level 2 if a patient reports a pain score of 7 out of 10 or more and the nurse’s subjective and objective evaluation indicates that the pain requires interventions beyond what can be provided at triage. In such cases, the triage nurse determines that it would not be appropriate for the patient to wait and assigns them to the last available bed.

Ultimately, when deciding if a patient qualifies for ESI level-2, the triage nurse needs to evaluate for severe distress, which can be either physiological or psychological. Beyond pain, patients with significant respiratory distress fulfill the physiological criteria for ESI level 2. Severe psychological distress may be seen in patients who are:

Deeply upset following a sexual assault.

Displaying disruptive behavior during triage.

Aggressive.

Individuals who have experienced domestic abuse.

Undergoing an intense response to grief.

These patients are typically prioritized by the triage nurse to be taken directly to the treatment area, allowing them to bypass the waiting room.

##### Summary

We have examined the essential elements and questions required to assess if a patient qualifies for ESI level-2. It is vital for the triage nurse to take these questions into account when evaluating every patient. Overlooking a high-risk scenario could lead to longer wait times and possibly adverse outcomes for the patient.

### Chapter 5. Expected Resource Needs

Historically, triage systems have relied exclusively on assessing the severity of a patient’s condition. In these systems, nurses determine an acuity level by judging how long a patient can safely wait before being evaluated by a healthcare provider. The Emergency Severity Index (ESI) introduces a different method by not only considering which patients require immediate attention, but also, for those with less severe conditions, estimating the resources that will likely be needed to reach a patient’s disposition. This chapter provides background on the rationale for incorporating resource prediction into the ESI and explains what is considered a resource. It also presents examples of patients classified as ESI levels 3 to 5, along with the anticipated resources each will require.

Traditionally, comprehensive triage has served as the primary approach for assigning triage acuity in U.S. emergency departments (Emergency Nurses Association [ENA], 1997, pp. 3-10; Gilboy, Travers & Wuerz, 1999). These triage systems rely on the nurse’s evaluation of vital signs, both subjective and objective data, medical history, allergies, and current medications to establish the level of triage acuity.

Predicting resource needs is a key component of the ESI for patients categorized as ESI level 3, 4, or 5. It is essential to note that resource allocation is not considered for patients with high acuity, such as those at ESI level 1 or 2. Resource prediction sets the ESI apart from other triage systems that focus solely on acuity. When Drs. Wuerz and Eitel developed the ESI triage system, they incorporated resource utilization to provide additional information and enable more precise triage decisions. They believed that experienced emergency department (ED) triage nurses could anticipate the types and quantities of tests, treatments, and consultations a patient would require during their ED visit. This has been supported by recent studies on ESI implementation and validation, which have demonstrated that triage nurses can accurately predict the resource needs of ED patients (Eitel, Travers, Rosenau, Gilboy & Wuerz, 2003; Tanabe, Gimbel, Yarnold & Adams, 2004). One such study, conducted across seven EDs in diverse geographic locations, including both urban and rural settings as well as academic and community hospitals, found that nurses using the ESI correctly predicted the number of resources needed by ED patients 70 percent of the time. In other words, experienced triage nurses using the ESI can reliably estimate at triage how many resources a patient will need to reach a disposition in the ED, and, more importantly, can distinguish between patients who will require low versus high resource intensity. This ability to differentiate based on resource needs enables more efficient patient flow at ED presentation by directing patients into different operational pathways, facilitating parallel processing. Additionally, research has shown that ESI triage levels are associated with significant patient outcomes, such as admission and mortality rates (Eitel et al., 2003).

It is important to remember that resource prediction applies only to patients who are less acutely ill. At decision points A and B in the ESI algorithm (Figure 5-1), the nurse determines if patients qualify for ESI levels 1 or 2 solely based on how severe their condition is. At decision point C, however, the nurse assigns ESI levels 3 through 5 by evaluating both the patient’s acuity and the resources they are likely to require. Therefore, the triage nurse takes resource needs into account only if the responses to decision points A and B are “no.”

To determine what resources an ED patient may require, the triage nurse should have a broad understanding of emergency department care standards and, more specifically, know what is considered reasonable and typical emergency care. One simple way to approach this is to consider, “Based on this patient’s main complaint, which resources are emergency providers most likely to use?”

The triage nurse relies on information gathered from a brief subjective and objective assessment, along with details such as past medical history, current medications, age, and gender, to estimate how many resources the ED provider will require to make a decision about the patient’s care. For instance, a healthy teenager with a straightforward leg laceration and no significant medical history would likely need just one resource: suturing. Conversely, an elderly patient with several chronic conditions and no prior episodes of dizziness who arrives with a head laceration from a fall will obviously require multiple resources, such as suturing, laboratory tests, ECG, imaging, or specialist consultations. Proper application of ESI triage depends on the nurse’s ability to anticipate resource needs, making it a task best suited for an experienced emergency nurse. Overall, regardless of the triage system in place, we maintain that triage should be conducted by a skilled emergency nurse to ensure patient safety.

Table 5-1 (also referenced as Table 3-1) outlines the guidelines for classifying resources within the ESI triage system. The distinction between ESI levels 3, 4, and 5 is based on the nurse’s assessment of the number of resources a patient will require for disposition. According to the triage nurse’s judgment, patients anticipated to need no resources are assigned to level 5, those expected to need one resource are placed in level 4, and patients likely to require two or more resources are categorized as ESI level 3. Research has shown that patients needing two or more resources experience higher rates of hospital admission, increased mortality, and longer emergency department stays (Eitel et al., 2003; Tanabe et al., 2004 Reliability and validity).

While Table 5-1 does not include every possible resource, it offers general direction regarding the types of diagnostic tests, procedures, and treatments that are considered resources within the ESI system. Emergency nurses using the ESI should avoid focusing too much on the specific definitions of each resource. The key point is that ESI only requires the triage nurse to estimate the resources a patient will likely need during their ED visit. Table 5-1 lists the most frequently used resources, but it is neither feasible nor necessary to list every potential ED resource. For accurate ESI assignment, it is sufficient to determine whether a patient will require no resources, one resource, or two or more resources. Once a triage nurse identifies two likely resources, further estimation is unnecessary. The main purpose of the ESI resource component is to distinguish patients with more complex, resource-intensive needs from those with simpler issues. For ESI triage, resources are defined as interventions that go beyond a basic exam or minor interventions by ED staff, or that involve personnel outside the ED. Resources that demand significant ED staff time (such as administering IV medications or inserting a chest tube) or require assistance from outside departments (like radiology for x-rays or surgical consultations) tend to increase the patient’s length of stay in the ED and reflect a higher level of patient complexity and triage category.

There are frequently asked questions regarding what qualifies as an ESI resource. One common question concerns how many blood or urine tests and x-rays count as a resource. According to the ESI triage system, the triage nurse should consider the number of different types of resources required to decide the patient’s disposition, rather than counting each individual test.

A complete blood count (CBC) and an electrolyte panel together make up a single laboratory test resource.

A complete blood count and a chest x-ray are two types of resources (laboratory test and imaging).

A CBC and a urinalysis are both laboratory tests, and when performed together, they are considered a single resource.

A chest x-ray and standard skull radiographs are one type of resource (x-ray).

Cervical spine X-rays and a head CT scan are two imaging resources (X-ray and CT scan).

Another commonly debated resource is the use of a splint, which is not considered a resource. If it were, patients with ankle sprains would be classified as ESI level 3 (requiring an x-ray and splint). Although applying a splint can require significant effort, it’s crucial to remember that resource prediction is solely intended to categorize patients and ensure they are directed to the appropriate area within the ED. In many emergency departments, ESI level-3 patients are not suitable for fast track or urgent care sections. Triage scores do not reflect the overall intensity of nursing workload.

Another frequently asked question about ESI resources concerns the inclusion of eye irrigation as a resource. Patients who experience a chemical splash to the eye are typically classified as ESI level-2 due to the high-risk nature of their injury, so the need for eye irrigation does not influence their ESI level. On the other hand, if the eye issue is caused by dust particles, the patient is not automatically considered high risk. In such cases, eye irrigation is counted as a resource, placing the patient at ESI level-4. Performing an eye exam is not considered a resource since it is part of the standard physical examination. Additional questions about resources are answered in Chapter 5’s Frequently Asked Questions section in Appendix A.

Clinicians often ask about the items categorized as “not resources” in Table 5-1. This list is designed to help triage nurses efficiently and accurately assign patients to one of five clinically distinct levels (Wuerz, Milne, Eitel, Travers & Gilboy, 2000). Items considered not to be resources include physical examinations, point-of-care testing, and procedures that generally do not increase a patient’s length of stay in the emergency department or suggest greater complexity. Because it is standard practice for all ED patients to receive a basic history and physical exam, these assessments—including pelvic exams—are not counted as resources for ESI classification. The strength of the ESI lies in its straightforwardness; the main aim of determining resources is to distinguish patients with more complex needs who require two or more resources (level 3 or higher) from those with less complicated issues who will likely need fewer than two resources (level 4 or 5). Emergency nurses should avoid overcomplicating the ESI by focusing too much on the specifics of resource definitions. In most cases, a patient will need either no resources, one resource, or two or more resources.

Although resource use can differ depending on the location, provider, or even the individual patient, triage nurses are encouraged to base their ESI resource predictions on the typical management of the most frequent presenting issues. Ideally, any patient arriving at an emergency department should require roughly the same types of resources. For instance, if a provider evaluates an 82-year-old nursing home resident with an indwelling urinary catheter who presents with fever and cough, it is likely that blood tests, urine tests, and a chest x-ray will be ordered. The triage nurse can reasonably anticipate that this patient will need two or more resources and should therefore assign an ESI level 3.

While there may be slight differences in procedures among various emergency departments, these usually do not significantly impact the triage rating. For instance, some departments perform pregnancy tests within the ED (which ESI does not count as a resource), while others send the tests to the lab (which ESI does count as a resource). However, it is uncommon for patients to require only a pregnancy test, as most will need at least one additional resource. One operational difference that can lead to varying ESI levels is how patients with a sole complaint of sore throat are managed. In some hospitals, throat cultures are routinely taken (counted as one resource, ESI level 4), whereas in others, they are not (no resources, ESI level 5). Another example is the application of the Ottawa Ankle Rules, which help determine if an ankle x-ray is necessary for patients with ankle injuries. The use of these rules differs between institutions; those that implement them at triage may order fewer x-rays compared to those that do not use the rules regularly.

Temperature is a key factor in evaluating the allocation of resources for infants and young children. This topic will be discussed in Chapter 6.

Clinically, patients classified as ESI level 4 and 5 can wait several hours before being seen by a provider. However, from a customer service perspective, these patients may be more appropriately managed in a fast-track or urgent care environment. Mid-level practitioners with the right skill set and supervision are capable of treating level-4 and 5 patients. The ESI system also offers an operational benefit, as level-5 patients can occasionally be accommodated for a quick assessment and disposition by a provider, even when the department is full. Frequently, triage policies specify that ESI level-4 or 5 patients may be directed to an urgent care or fast-track area.

In conclusion, the ESI introduces a novel method for emergency department triage by incorporating predictions regarding the number of resources required to determine patient disposition. For patients classified as ESI levels 3, 4, and 5, resource needs are factored into the triage level, whereas decisions for ESI levels 1 and 2 rely solely on the severity of the patient’s condition. Table 5-2 provides examples of patients in ESI levels 3, 4, and 5. In practice, estimating resource needs has proven highly useful for managing the large volume of patients presenting with non-acute issues.

### Chapter 6.The Role of Vital Signs in ESI Triage

##### Introduction Figure 6-1. Danger Zone Vital Signs

This chapter centers on decision point D, which involves evaluating the patient's vital signs. By this stage in the ESI algorithm, the triage nurse has already established that the patient does not qualify for ESI level 1 or 2 and will need two or more resources. Because the patient requires at least two resources, they are classified as at least ESI level 3. At this juncture, the nurse reviews the patient’s vital signs, including heart rate, respiratory rate, and oxygen saturation, and, for children under three, temperature as well. If any of the vital signs exceed the danger zone thresholds (as shown in decision point D, Figure 6-1), the nurse should seriously consider upgrading the patient’s triage level from 3 to 2.

In the ESI triage training program, significant time should be allocated to discussing how vital signs impact the decision to reclassify a patient from ESI level 3 to level 2. It is important to emphasize that the experienced triage nurse is ultimately responsible for determining if a patient qualifies for ESI level 2, taking into account the patient’s medical history, current medications, and both subjective and objective assessments, including overall appearance. This determination relies on the nurse’s clinical expertise and understanding of normal vital sign ranges for all age groups, as well as the effects of factors like medications, medical history, and pain levels.

##### What Are Vital Signs?

Vital signs are typically basic measurements of physiological functions such as temperature, blood pressure, pulse, respiratory rate, and pulse oximetry (refer to Table 6-1). These measurements often guide healthcare professionals in choosing a specific course of action. In recent years, nursing literature has increasingly highlighted the significance of pain, with the American Pain Society coining the term “Pain: the fifth vital sign” to raise awareness among healthcare providers about the need to assess and manage pain. Pain evaluation is a key part of the ESI and is actually considered earlier in its process. For ESI purposes, the vital sign parameters used at decision point D for children under three years old include heart rate, respiratory rate, oxygen saturation, and temperature. Vital signs provide objective data that help determine a patient’s general health status and viability. The results influence how we assess a patient’s overall condition and guide our decisions regarding diagnosis and treatment. Nevertheless, vital signs alone do not offer a complete understanding of a patient’s health. They can be influenced by various factors, such as prescription drugs, herbal supplements, and recreational substances. For instance, beta-blockers can cause a slow heart rate and mask the typical rapid heart rate seen in shock. Hypothyroidism, especially in older adults, may result in low body temperature even during severe infections like sepsis. Similarly, a young adult’s elevated temperature could be due to recreational drug use.

Vital signs are fluctuating, dynamic markers that supplement a patient’s assessment. Their measurement can depend on the person taking them, and what is considered a normal vital sign can differ based on the source referenced. Even in optimal circumstances, vital signs may not always be dependable or precise (Edmonds, Mower, Lovato & Lomeli, 2002). Often, the patient’s overall appearance and clinical context are most informative. Nevertheless, if a triage nurse believes that knowing a patient’s vital signs would assist in evaluating risk, then they should be recorded. For instance, if a patient is on immunosuppressive drugs, undergoing chemotherapy, or has an illness like AIDS that suppresses the immune system, it is important to check their body temperature.

##### Are Vital Signs Necessary at Triage?

Before the introduction of five-level triage in the United States, it was customary for every patient arriving at an emergency department to have their vital signs measured prior to being assigned a triage level. Vital signs were viewed as a crucial part of the initial nursing evaluation and frequently served as a basis for decision-making. In the traditional three-level triage system, vital signs played a key role in determining how long a patient could safely wait for care; if vital signs were normal, patients were often able to wait longer. As a result, vital signs historically carried significant weight in triage assessments, sometimes more so than the patient’s clinical presentation.

Recently, updated triage models recommend that vital signs be used selectively during triage (Gilboy, Travers & Wuerz, 2000). In many five-level triage systems, taking initial vital signs is not required and is generally not done for level-1 or level-2 patients, who are the most critically ill. For instance, the Guidelines for Implementation of the Australasian Triage Scale in Emergency Departments specify that “vital signs should only be measured at triage if required to estimate urgency, or if time permits” (Australasian College for Emergency Medicine, 2000). Likewise, the Canadian Triage and Acuity Scale (CTAS) states that vital signs are only needed if they are essential for determining the triage level, particularly for levels 3, 4, and 5, and only if time allows (Beveridge et al., 2002). The Manchester Triage Group incorporates specific vital sign criteria as part of its decision-making flow chart, using these parameters to help the triage nurse determine the patient’s acuity level.

Vital signs are not always the best method for determining triage acuity. Some research indicates that taking vital signs may not be essential during the initial triage assessment. In 2002, Cooper, Flaherty, Lin, and Hubbell studied how vital signs influence triage status, also taking into account factors like age and the ability to communicate. Their study involved over 14,000 patients across 24 emergency departments in the United States. The findings showed that vital signs altered the triage acuity level in only 8% of cases. When looking more closely at specific age groups, children aged 2 or younger experienced the greatest change in triage decisions, with an 11.4% difference after vital signs were obtained.

##### Vital Signs and ESI Triage

With ESI triage, the only strict requirement to check vital signs applies to patients who do not initially qualify for ESI level 1 or 2, but are expected to need two or more resources. For patients assigned to ESI levels 1, 2, 4, or 5, taking vital signs at triage is optional and left to the triage nurse’s judgment. Although the ESI system does not mandate vital sign assessment for every patient at triage, individual institutions may have their own protocols. Hospital policies on vital sign assessment at triage are shaped by factors like staffing, patient mix, and available resources, which are not addressed in this handbook. Generally, it is always acceptable to take vital signs when triaging a stable patient. ESI specifically requires vital signs to be taken for level-3 patients. (Refer to Table 6-2)

The creators of the ESI and the current research team agree that experienced emergency department nurses can incorporate vital sign information alongside their clinical judgment when assigning ESI ratings to patients. However, there is limited evidence linking abnormal vital signs to emergency department acuity or confirming that these abnormalities reliably indicate serious illness. Over time, the ESI has been updated to incorporate new evidence and recommendations from the literature. Initially, the ESI working group relied on systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS) research (Rangel-Frausto et al., 1995) to develop the danger zone vital sign criteria and related footnotes. The first ESI version used SIRS criteria, specifically a heart rate over 90 in adults, as a definitive reason to upgrade a patient from ESI level 3 to level 2 (Wuerz, Milne, Eitel, Travers & Gilboy, 2000). Since the SIRS studies focused on mortality predictors in intensive care unit patients, applying these criteria in the ED led to too many false positives at the initial ESI sites. As a result, the heart rate threshold was increased to 100 in ESI version 2, and nurses were advised to consider upgrading adult patients with heart rates above 100 to ESI level 2 (Wuerz et al., 2001; Gilboy, Tanabe, Travers, Eitel & Wuerz, 2003). The danger zone vital sign criteria were also expanded to include pediatric vital signs.

When applying ESI as a triage method, it is not required to assess vital signs in the triage area for patients who are promptly assigned to level 1 or 2. If a patient appears unstable or has a primary complaint that demands immediate intervention, they should be quickly moved to the treatment area. In these cases, the resuscitation team will obtain and monitor vital signs at the bedside. This includes patients whose clinical presentation suggests a high risk or an urgent need for cardiovascular or respiratory support, such as those who look pale, sweaty, or cyanotic. Nevertheless, the triage nurse may choose to check vital signs in the triage area if there is no available bed or if they believe that vital sign data could help determine the correct triage level. Some patients may only be recognized as ESI level 1 after their vital signs are measured. For instance, an elderly patient who is awake and alert but complains of dizziness may be found to have a critical condition if their heart rate is discovered to be 32 or 180 during the assessment.

As outlined in the ESI algorithm in Chapter 3, when patients do not qualify for ESI level-1 or 2, the triage nurse proceeds to decision point C. At this stage, the nurse evaluates how many resources the patient is likely to require in the emergency department. If only one or no resources are anticipated, the patient can be categorized as ESI level 4 or 5, and a vital sign check is not needed. However, if two or more resources are expected, the nurse moves to decision point D, where vital signs should be measured. Vital signs are particularly significant for some patients during triage, especially those assigned to ESI level 3, as they can provide additional evidence of possible serious illness. If any vital signs fall within the danger zone, it is advised that the triage nurse consider upgrading the patient from level 3 to level 2.

The ESI triage system specifically incorporates heart rate, respiratory rate, and oxygen saturation (for patients who may have respiratory issues) as vital signs. Temperature is only factored into ESI triage for children younger than three years old. Notably, blood pressure is not part of the ESI algorithm when evaluating abnormal vital signs. However, this does not imply that triage nurses should avoid measuring blood pressure or temperature in older children or adults; rather, these measurements are not typically used to determine the correct triage acuity level.

##### Vital Signs and Pediatric Fever

In this edition of the ESI Handbook, version 4 (v.4) of the ESI algorithm has been revised to reflect updated pediatric fever guidelines. As illustrated in Figure 6-2, note D of the ESI algorithm covers pediatric fever criteria relevant to ESI triage. This part includes guidance from the American College of Emergency Physicians’ Clinical Policy for Children Under Three Years Old Presenting to the Emergency Department With Fever (ACEP, 2003).

The ESI Triage Research Team advises that vital signs should be checked in patients younger than 3 years old during triage. Specifically, taking a temperature is crucial for all children from birth up to 36 months, and assessing vital signs is a key part of evaluating any infant under 36 months with a known fever (Baraff, 2000). This process helps distinguish between ESI level-2 and level-3 patients and reduces the chance that children who may have bacteremia are inappropriately directed to express care or made to wait too long. It is important to note that any patient who is at immediate risk or in serious danger will be categorized as ESI level 1 or 2.

Table 6-3 offers guidance for triage nurses on using the ESI to evaluate febrile children and select the most suitable triage level. Fever is commonly defined as a rectal temperature above 38.0° C (100.4° F) (Baraff et al., 1993; ACEP, 2003). Infants younger than 28 days with a fever should be regarded as high risk and given at least an ESI level 2. For infants aged 28 days to 3 months, there are no definitive guidelines. The ESI research team advises triage nurses to follow their hospital’s protocols. It is recommended that nurses consider assigning at least an ESI level 2 to these patients.

In version 4 of the ESI, we have adopted a different set of guidelines for managing fever in children aged 3 to 36 months. These guidelines focus on children with high fevers, defined as a temperature above 39.0° C (102.2° F) (ACEP, 2003). When evaluating a highly febrile child in this age group, the triage nurse should determine the child’s immunization status and whether there is a clear cause for the fever. If the child is not fully immunized or if no source for the fever can be identified, the child should be categorized as at least ESI level 3. However, if the child’s immunizations are current and there is an identifiable reason for the fever, an ESI level of 4 or 5 is suitable. For instance, a 7-month-old who is under pediatric care, has received the Haemophilus influenza type b (HIB) vaccine, and presents with a fever while tugging at his ear could be classified as ESI level 5.

##### Case Examples

The case studies below illustrate how vital signs information is utilized during ESI triage.

A healthy-appearing 28-year-old woman states, “My doctor said I’m around 6 weeks pregnant, and I believe I might be having a miscarriage.” She explains, “I began spotting this morning and am now experiencing cramps.” She has no allergies or past medical history and is taking prenatal vitamins. Her vital signs are: temperature 98°F, heart rate 112, respiratory rate 22, and blood pressure 90/60.

This patient qualifies for an upgrade from level 3 to level 2 due to her vital signs. Her elevated heart rate and respiratory rate, along with low blood pressure, are worrisome. These symptoms may suggest internal hemorrhage caused by a ruptured ectopic pregnancy.

The mother of a 15-month-old reports that her baby has been experiencing diarrhea since the previous day. She mentions that everyone in the family has recently had the gastrointestinal virus that is circulating. The baby has shown reduced appetite, a mild fever, and several episodes of watery stools. The child is calmly sitting on the mother’s lap. The triage nurse observes indications of dehydration. There is no past medical history, no known drug allergies, and the baby is not on any medications. Vital signs are: temperature 100.4°F, heart rate 142, respiratory rate 48, and blood pressure 76/50.

This patient qualifies for at least ESI level 3. He will need laboratory tests and intravenous fluids as resources. Given his vital signs, the triage nurse may escalate him to ESI level 2. In an infant of this age, both heart rate and respiratory rate exceed the normal limits.

A 57-year-old woman states, “I need to see a doctor about my cough. I just can’t get rid of it. I barely slept last night because I was coughing so much, and now I’m extremely tired.” She mentions having a fever of 101° last night and is producing yellow sputum when she coughs. Her medical history includes a hysterectomy three years ago; she is not on any medications but is allergic to Penicillin. Her vital signs are: temperature 101.4°, respiratory rate 28, heart rate 100, and oxygen saturation 90 percent.

At the start of her triage evaluation, this patient appears to possibly have pneumonia. She is likely to require two or more resources, but her low oxygen levels and rapid breathing are worrisome. Based on her vital signs, the triage nurse should upgrade her to an ESI level 2.

A 34-year-old obese woman arrives at triage with complaints of diffuse abdominal pain rated 6 out of 10, ongoing for the past two days. She reports multiple episodes of vomiting and notes that her last bowel movement was three days ago. Her medical history includes back surgery; she is not on any medications and has a peanut allergy. Her vital signs are: temperature 97.8°F, heart rate 104, respiratory rate 16, blood pressure 132/80, and oxygen saturation 99%.

This patient will require at least two resources, such as laboratory tests, IV fluids, possibly IV medication for nausea, and a CT scan. The triage nurse should assess the patient’s vital signs, paying attention to the heart rate. Although the heart rate is slightly outside the normal range for the patient’s age, this may be attributed to pain or physical activity. Therefore, the appropriate action is to categorize the patient as ESI level 3.

A crying 9-year-old arrives at triage with her mother after slipping on an icy sidewalk and hurting her right forearm. The forearm appears clearly deformed, but circulation, sensation, and movement are intact. According to her mother, she has no allergies, is not on any medications, and is otherwise healthy. Her vital signs are: blood pressure 100/68, heart rate 124, respiratory rate 32, and oxygen saturation 99 percent.

The child is in pain from her fall and is clearly distressed. She will need at least two resources: an x-ray and an orthopedic consultation, and possibly conscious sedation. Although her heart rate and breathing are increased, the triage nurse can confidently assign her to ESI level 3. The changes in her vital signs are most likely caused by pain and emotional upset.

A 72-year-old woman arrives at the emergency department using nasal cannula oxygen for her advanced COPD. She tells the triage nurse that she has an infected cat bite on her left hand, which appears red, swollen, and tender. She has no other health issues, uses albuterol as needed, and takes a daily aspirin. She has no known drug allergies. Her vital signs are: temperature 99.6°F, heart rate 88, respiratory rate 22, blood pressure 138/80, and oxygen saturation 91%. She reports no difficulty breathing.

This patient needs at least two resources: laboratory tests and intravenous antibiotics. She qualifies for ESI level 3. Although the triage nurse observes that her oxygen saturation and respiratory rate fall outside the normal adult range, the patient has advanced COPD. Therefore, these vital signs are not worrisome, and she will remain at ESI level 3 without being up-triaged.

##### Case Examples

The case studies below illustrate how vital signs information is utilized during ESI triage.

A healthy-appearing 28-year-old woman states, “My doctor said I’m approximately 6 weeks pregnant, and I believe I might be having a miscarriage.” She reports, “I began spotting this morning and am now experiencing cramping.” She has no allergies or past medical history and is taking prenatal vitamins. Her vital signs are: temperature 98°F, heart rate 112, respiratory rate 22, and blood pressure 90/60.

This patient qualifies for an upgrade from level 3 to level 2 due to her vital signs. Her elevated heart rate and respiratory rate, along with low blood pressure, are worrisome. These symptoms may suggest internal hemorrhage caused by a ruptured ectopic pregnancy.

The mother of a 15-month-old reports that her baby has been experiencing diarrhea since the previous day. She mentions that everyone in the family has recently had the gastrointestinal virus that is circulating. The baby has shown reduced appetite, a mild fever, and several episodes of watery stools. The child is calmly sitting on the mother’s lap. The triage nurse observes indications of dehydration. There is no past medical history, no known drug allergies, and the baby is not on any medications. Vital signs are: temperature 100.4°F, heart rate 142, respiratory rate 48, and blood pressure 76/50.

This patient qualifies for at least ESI level 3. He will need laboratory tests and intravenous fluids as resources. Given his vital signs, the triage nurse may escalate him to ESI level 2. In an infant of this age, both heart rate and respiratory rate exceed the normal limits.

A 57-year-old woman states, “I need to see a doctor about my cough. I just can’t get rid of it. I barely slept last night because I was coughing so much, and now I’m extremely tired.” She mentions having a fever of 101° last night and is producing yellow sputum when she coughs. Her medical history includes a hysterectomy three years ago; she is not on any medications but is allergic to Penicillin. Her vital signs are: temperature 101.4°, respiratory rate 28, heart rate 100, and oxygen saturation 90 percent.

At the start of her triage evaluation, this patient appears to possibly have pneumonia. She is likely to require two or more resources, but her low oxygen levels and rapid breathing are worrisome. Based on her vital signs, the triage nurse should upgrade her to an ESI level 2.

A 34-year-old obese woman arrives at triage with complaints of diffuse abdominal pain rated 6 out of 10, ongoing for the past two days. She reports multiple episodes of vomiting and notes that her last bowel movement was three days ago. Her medical history includes back surgery; she is not on any medications and has a peanut allergy. Her vital signs are: temperature 97.8°F, heart rate 104, respiratory rate 16, blood pressure 132/80, and oxygen saturation 99%.

This patient will require at least two resources, such as laboratory tests, intravenous fluids, possibly IV medication for nausea, and a CT scan. The triage nurse should assess the patient’s vital signs, paying attention to the heart rate. Although the heart rate is slightly outside the normal range for the patient’s age, this may be attributed to pain or physical activity. Therefore, the appropriate action is to categorize the patient as ESI level 3.

A crying 9-year-old arrives at triage with her mother after slipping on an icy sidewalk and hurting her right forearm. The forearm appears clearly deformed, but circulation, sensation, and movement are intact. According to her mother, the child has no allergies, is not on any medications, and is otherwise healthy. Her vital signs are: blood pressure 100/68, heart rate 124, respiratory rate 32, and oxygen saturation 99 percent.

The child is in pain from her fall and is clearly distressed. She will need at least two resources: an x-ray and an orthopedic consultation, and possibly conscious sedation. Although her heart rate and breathing are increased, the triage nurse can appropriately assign her to ESI level 3. The changes in her vital signs are most likely caused by pain and emotional upset.

A 72-year-old woman arrives at the emergency department using nasal cannula oxygen for her severe COPD. She tells the triage nurse about an infected cat bite on her left hand, which appears red, swollen, and tender. She has no other health issues, uses albuterol as needed, and takes a daily aspirin. She has no known drug allergies. Her vital signs are: temperature 99.6°F, heart rate 88, respiratory rate 22, blood pressure 138/80, and oxygen saturation 91%. She reports no difficulty breathing.

This patient needs at least two resources: laboratory tests and intravenous antibiotics. She qualifies for ESI level 3. Although the triage nurse observes that her oxygen saturation and respiratory rate fall outside the normal adult range, the patient has advanced COPD. Therefore, these vital signs are not worrisome in her case, and she will remain at ESI level 3 without being up-triaged.

##### Conclusion

This chapter lays the groundwork for comprehending how vital signs are used within the Emergency Severity Index triage system. It also discusses the unique considerations for patients younger than 36 months. More research is needed to determine the most appropriate vital sign thresholds for emergency department triage. Additional studies will focus on pediatric patients arriving at the emergency department. We anticipate that future updates to the ESI will incorporate more evidence about how well triage vital signs predict outcomes for both pediatric and adult patients.

### Appendix A. Frequently Asked Questions

##### Chapter 3.

###### Frequently Asked Questions

1. Is it necessary to raise the triage level for an adult patient if their heart rate exceeds 100?

No, it is something to take into account.

2. Is it necessary to increase a patient’s triage level if their pain score is 7 out of 10 or higher?

No, this is just one aspect to take into account.

If a patient is chronically confused, does that mean they should always be assigned to ESI level 2?

No, patients experiencing a sudden change in consciousness are classified as ESI level 2.

4. At what times should vital signs be measured?

For any patient classified as ESI level-3, vital signs are always taken if the triage nurse believes they could be helpful.

##### Chapter 4.

###### Frequently Asked Questions

1. Is it necessary to assign an ESI triage level of 2 to a 25-year-old woman who reports her pain as 10 out of 10 but is eating potato chips?

No. Since her vital signs are stable and she doesn’t meet any high-risk criteria, this patient should be categorized as ESI level 3. She will probably require lab tests and at least two resources, such as x-rays, an IV, or pain medication. Therefore, you should not allocate your last available bed to her.

Should an 80-year-old woman with ongoing confusion be assigned an ESI level 2 during triage?

No. The sudden appearance of confusion, lethargy, or disorientation qualifies for ESI level 2.

3. Shouldn’t a patient experiencing active chest pain be assigned an ESI level 1? After all, they ought to receive the highest priority.

Not every patient presenting with chest pain qualifies for ESI level-1. Patients who are unresponsive, without a pulse, not breathing, or in need of immediate life-saving measures fall under level-1. Those with chest pain who appear pale, sweaty, have low blood pressure, or a slow heart rate, and need urgent IV access to stabilize their condition, are also considered level-1. Patients who are stable but experiencing ongoing chest pain generally meet high-risk criteria and should be assigned ESI level-2, with prompt placement ensured.

##### Chapter 5.

###### Frequently Asked Questions

1. Why isn’t teaching someone how to walk with crutches considered a resource?

Although teaching patients how to use crutches can take up a significant amount of the emergency department staff’s time, this instruction is frequently given to individuals with uncomplicated ankle sprains. These cases are generally categorized as ESI level 4 (ankle x-ray = one resource). Such patients are clearly less acute and require fewer resources compared to more complicated cases, such as those with tibia or fibula fractures, who are typically classified as ESI level 3 (leg x-rays, orthopedic consultation, casting or splinting, IV pain management = two or more resources). Using a nursing resource intensity measure would more accurately represent the effort ED staff put into providing crutch-walking instruction.

2. Why doesn’t a splint qualify as a resource?

Using basic, pre-made splints (like those for ankle sprains) does not count as a resource. However, when ED staff create and apply splints, such as thumb spica splints for thumb fractures, this is considered a resource. To distinguish between patients with extremity injuries: those suspected of having fractures should be assigned ESI level 3 (requiring two or more resources, such as x-rays, pain medication, and the creation and application of splints or casts), while patients who likely have simple sprains should be classified as ESI level 4.

3. Why isn’t a saline or heparin lock considered a resource?

In general, placing a heparin lock does not require much time from the emergency department staff. Nevertheless, most patients who receive heparin locks also need at least two additional resources, such as lab tests or IV medications, which typically results in them being categorized as ESI level 3 regardless.

Are all patients undergoing conscious sedation classified as ESI level 3 or above?

Conscious sedation is regarded as a complex procedure (requiring two resources) and is typically carried out on patients who are also undergoing laboratory tests, x-rays, or additional interventions like fracture reduction or dilation and curettage.

5. Are eye irrigation, administration of nebulized medications, and blood transfusions classified as resources?

All three are classified as resources in the context of ESI triage ratings. These resources are typically utilized for patients with more acute conditions, demand considerable time from emergency department staff, and are likely to result in extended patient stays.

6. Do all patients with asthma fall under ESI level 4 since they will need nebulized treatment?

No. Asthma patients who are stable and only need nebulized medication are classified as ESI level 4. Some, however, experience severe respiratory distress and qualify for ESI level 2. Others fall in between, needing intravenous steroids or an x-ray along with nebulized treatments, and are categorized as ESI level 3. Lastly, those who just need a prescription refill for their inhaler are placed in ESI level 5, as they do not need any resources.

##### Chapter 6.

###### Frequently Asked Questions

Why is it unnecessary to obtain vital signs when triaging patients classified as ESI level 1 or 2?

Vital signs are not required to classify patients as life-threatening (ESI level 1) or high-risk (ESI level 2). Because patients at ESI levels 1 and 2 are in critical condition, they need an immediate response from the medical team. Multiple actions can take place at the same time, and vital signs may be obtained during the initial evaluation in the main acute section of the emergency department.

2. Why are vital signs not mandatory for patients classified as ESI level-4 and 5?

Vital signs are not required to classify patients as low or no resource (ESI level 4 or 5). Additionally, the pain, anxiety, and discomfort experienced during an emergency department visit can often affect a patient’s vital signs, which may normalize soon after the initial evaluation. However, if there are indications of abnormal symptoms—such as altered skin color, mental status changes, dizziness, or sweating—a nurse may decide to check vital signs. If there are no physical signs suggesting the need for vital sign assessment, the patient can be directed to the main emergency department or an express care room.

3. What is the reason for taking vital signs on patients classified as ESI level-3?

Vital signs help distinguish between patients who require multiple resources and are stable (ESI level 3) and those who may be unstable or at higher risk (ESI level 2). Sometimes, patients classified as ESI level 3 may actually have unstable vital signs despite appearing stable. For ESI level-3 patients, checking vital signs acts as an important safety measure. Typically, ESI level-3 patients have more complex conditions and many end up being admitted to the hospital. Because they are not suitable for the fast-track area, these patients may need to wait for more comprehensive care. They pose a particular challenge during triage, making it essential for caregivers to use vital signs to ensure the correct ESI level is assigned.

4. Why are temperatures always taken for pediatric patients under 36 months of age?

Temperature helps distinguish pediatric patients who require few or no resources (ESI level 4 or 5) from those likely to need multiple resources. In infants under three months old, an abnormal temperature may suggest bacteremia and categorize the child as high-risk.

5. What causes the literature to offer differing perspectives on the importance of vital signs in the triage process?

There is no conclusive evidence regarding the usefulness of vital signs in emergency department triage. Numerous elements can impact the reliability of vital sign measurements, which are somewhat dependent on the person performing the assessment. In certain situations, factors like long-term medication use (such as beta-blockers) can influence vital signs. Additionally, vital signs can serve to meet some public health responsibilities that emergency departments have. Finally, they are also useful for categorizing young pediatric patients into different groups.

6. Does JCAHO mandate that vital signs be taken during triage?

The Joint Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations does not explicitly define a standard for vital signs. However, it does state that physiologic parameters should be evaluated based on the patient's condition.

7. Should the vital sign thresholds in the danger zone box be strictly enforced?

In everyday practice, surpassing the danger zone vital sign thresholds leads to up-triage being “considered” instead of being done automatically. The skilled triage nurse must apply sound clinical judgment when assigning the patient’s ESI level. This decision involves evaluating the patient’s vital signs, medical history, medications, and overall clinical presentation. Further research is necessary to establish how well vital signs at triage predict outcomes and to define exact thresholds for up-triage.

8. What should be done if patients classified as ESI level-4 or 5 present with danger zone vital signs?

Although taking vital signs is not necessary to assign ESI levels 4 or 5, many patients may still have their vitals checked during triage if that is part of the emergency department’s procedures. According to the ESI triage algorithm, the triage nurse does not need to consider vital signs when determining if a patient qualifies for ESI level 5 (no resources) or ESI level 4 (one resource). Nonetheless, in real-world settings, a careful nurse will use clinical judgment and may factor in vital sign data when assigning the ESI level. For example, if a patient only wants a prescription refill, has no acute symptoms, and presents with a heart rate of 104 after walking to the ED, the nurse may still assign an ESI level 5. Conversely, if the same patient has a heart rate of 148 and it is irregular, the nurse should assign an ESI level 2. The triage nurse must also address situations such as elevated blood pressure in a patient otherwise meeting ESI level 4 or 5 criteria. If the patient has no symptoms related to the high blood pressure, the triage level should remain unchanged. Typically, elevated blood pressure in an asymptomatic patient will not be treated in the ED, but it is important to refer the patient to a primary care provider for further evaluation and long-term management.

# Emergency Severity Index, Version 4: Implementation Handbook

### Note from the Director

The Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality is proud to present the Emergency Severity Index, Version 4: Implementation Handbook. This guide details every aspect of the Emergency Severity Index (ESI), a five-level triage system used in emergency departments to categorize patients into five groups—ranging from 1 (most urgent) to 5 (least urgent)—based on the severity of their condition and the resources they require.

Following the creation of the ESI by emergency physicians Richard Wuerz and David Eitel in 1998 and successful pilot testing, the ESI Triage Group was established. Additional development of the ESI was supported by a grant from AHRQ. This group, made up of clinicians, managers, educators, and researchers, continued to improve the algorithm into its current form.

Aligned with our mission to enhance the quality, safety, efficiency, and effectiveness of health care for all Americans, AHRQ places a strong focus on training. This handbook, together with the two included DVDs, offers essential support to emergency department nurses, physicians, and administrators in establishing a thorough ESI educational program. The resources are based on ESI Version 4, which features updates to the algorithm, particularly expanding the criteria for ESI level 1 and refining the guidelines for pediatric fever.

An effectively executed ESI program enables hospital emergency departments to quickly recognize patients requiring urgent care, more accurately identify those who can be safely and efficiently treated in a fast-track or urgent care setting instead of the main ED, and better establish criteria for diverting ambulance patients away from the ED.

We hope this tool proves helpful as you continue working to enhance the quality of care in your emergency department.

### Chapter 2.Triage Acuity Systems

##### Standardization of Triage Acuity

Despite the fact that U.S. emergency departments (EDs) receive over 110 million visits annually (McCaig & Burt, 2004), there is a lack of comprehensive data on these visits at the local, regional, or national scale. This scarcity of information makes it challenging to address key questions such as “Which EDs treat the most critically ill patients?” and “What impact does patient acuity have on ED overcrowding?” As a result, there is increasing interest in developing standardized ED data systems in the United States to enhance clinical care, facilitate ED monitoring, enable benchmarking, and support research efforts (Barthell, Coonan, Finnell, Pollock, & Cochrane, 2004; Gilboy, Travers & Wuerz, 1999; Handler et al., 2004; National Center for Injury Prevention and Control).

A key data point in the emergency department is triage acuity, described by the Data Elements for Emergency Department Systems Task Force as the categorization of a patient’s condition based on how life- or limb-threatening it is, and whether urgent intervention is required to relieve symptoms (NCIPC, 1997, p. 94).

There is significant inconsistency among emergency department triage acuity systems, especially within the United States (Emergency Nurses Association [ENA], 1997). Different systems use varying terminology for triage categories, and there is no universal consensus on the definitions for each level. Table 2-1 provides examples of acuity rating systems. Due to the absence of standardized triage acuity data in the U.S., it is understandable that the emergency department has been referred to as a “black box” of crucial public health information that remains mostly inaccessible in its current state (Martinez, 1995).

The Emergency Severity Index (ESI) is an innovative tool for assessing triage acuity in emergency departments. Research has demonstrated its consistency across various ED environments, including both urban and rural areas as well as academic and community hospitals (Eitel, Travers, Rosenau, Gilboy & Wuerz, 2003). With widespread adoption in U.S. emergency departments, the ESI could serve as a standard method for triage acuity assessment. This chapter outlines the traditional triage systems used in U.S. EDs and reviews the research related to those systems. It then provides a brief overview of newer triage approaches developed in Australia, Canada, and the United Kingdom. The chapter ends with an examination of studies on the ESI system and explores its potential advantages.

##### Triage Systems in the United States

Although numerous hospitals in the United States continue to utilize three- or four-level triage systems, there is a movement toward adopting five-level systems. The National Center for Health Statistics intends to substitute four-level triage data with five-level data in upcoming national benchmarking surveys of U.S. emergency departments. This change is driven by increasing evidence that five-level triage acuity data are more reliable and valid compared to three-level systems (personal communication, Linda McCaig, National Center for Health Statistics, October 6, 2004).

Both the ENA and the American College of Emergency Physicians (ACEP) have expressed their support for five-level triage systems in U.S. emergency departments. In 2003, a joint task force from ENA and ACEP was formed to review the evidence regarding five-level triage systems, and their work is still in progress. That same year, ACEP and ENA released a joint statement:

ACEP and ENA believe that patient care quality would improve by introducing a standardized triage scale and acuity classification system in emergency departments. Drawing on expert consensus and current evidence, ACEP and ENA endorse the use of a dependable, validated five-level triage scale (ACEP, 2003; ENA, 2003).

A 2005 task force paper recommended both the ESI and the Canadian Triage and Acuity Scale (CTAS) as reliable and valid triage methods (Fernandes et al., 2005). With increasing evidence favoring five-level triage systems, it is probable that a greater number of U.S. hospitals have adopted some version of this approach. The ENA intends to gather information on the types of triage systems used in U.S. hospitals in their forthcoming ED survey.

##### Research on Triage Systems in the United States

Research on triage acuity systems is increasing, with studies primarily examining two important aspects of triage nurses’ acuity ratings: reliability and validity (Pedhazur & Schmelkin, 1991; Waltz, Strickland & Lenz, 1991). Reliability refers to the consistency or level of agreement among users of a rating system. In the context of emergency department (ED) triage, two forms of reliability are relevant. Interrater reliability assesses whether two different nurses assign the same triage acuity level to the same patient, while intrarater reliability evaluates if the same nurse gives consistent acuity ratings to the same patient over time. Multiple studies in the United States have found that traditional three-level triage systems often have low interrater and intrarater reliability (Gill, Reese & Diamond, 1996; Travers, Waller, Bowling, Flowers & Tintinalli, 2002; Wuerz, Fernandes & Alarcon, 1998). For example, in one study, 305 triage assessments were analyzed after all triage nurses completed a required refresher course on the hospital’s three-level triage system (Travers et al., 2002). The initial ratings by triage nurses were compared to retrospective ratings made by an expert panel of ED triage nurses, and the two groups agreed in only about half of the cases.

Validity refers to how accurately the rating system measures what it is supposed to measure. In the context of acuity ratings, validity indicates whether a label such as “nonurgent” truly reflects the absence of urgency in an emergency department patient’s condition. Assessing the validity of triage acuity has been challenging, and research studies have not reported on it.

In contrast to urine culture—which serves as the gold standard for accurately diagnosing urinary tract infections—there is no definitive gold standard for assessing the accuracy of triage acuity ratings in the conventional three-level triage system used in the United States. Nevertheless, surrogate indicators such as admission rates, resource use, and six-month mortality have been employed to evaluate five-level triage systems.

##### Triage Acuity Research on Five- Level Systems Abroad

Highly reliable and well-established five-level triage systems are now standard practice in various countries. Table 2-2 outlines three of these systems.

The Australasian Triage Scale (ATS), created in Australia, has been implemented across Australia and New Zealand since the early 1990s (Australasian College for Emergency Medicine, 1994, 2002; Cameron, Bradt & Ashby, 1996). The Australian Council on Healthcare Standards uses the ATS as the foundation for emergency department (ED) evaluation and quality assurance, with triage classifications regularly reviewed. Australian EDs are required to manage patients according to guidelines determined by their triage level. For instance, emergency cases must be attended to within 10 minutes, while nonurgent cases should be seen within 2 hours.

Several studies have assessed the validity and reliability of the ATS. Since there is no definitive gold standard for evaluating triage acuity, researchers have compared the five-level system to other illness severity scales and patient outcomes (Cameron et al., 1996; Cleary, Ashby, Jelinek & Lagaida, 1994; Erwich, Bond, Phillips, & Baggoley, 1997). Triage categories have shown strong correlations with disease- and population-specific measures, such as the Injury Severity Scales, trauma scores, and scales for cardiac, asthma, and pediatric patients. The ATS has also demonstrated a strong relationship with resource use and outcome indicators, including admission rates, emergency department length of stay, and mortality. Additionally, studies in which triage nurses assigned acuity levels to case scenarios have found that the ATS exhibits fair to moderate interrater reliability (Dilley & Standen, 1998; Jelinek & Little, 1996).

Five-level triage systems have been adopted in both the United Kingdom (U.K.) and Canada. In the U.K., the Manchester Triage Scale is utilized.

The system, developed in the U.K., uses a flow-chart presentation style (Manchester Triage Group, 1997). Nurses begin by determining the patient's main complaint, then select one of 52 flow charts to guide a structured interview and assign a triage category ranging from 1 (requiring immediate attention) to 5 (care needed within four hours). The Accident and Emergency Nurses Association has endorsed this system (Zimmermann, 2001). However, research on the Manchester system is limited. In one reliability study, triage assessments by nurses were retrospectively compared to those of senior medical staff, with only fair to moderate agreement found (Goodacre, Gillett, Harris & Houlihan, 1999).

The Canadian Triage and Acuity Scale (CTAS) was created by a team of Canadian emergency physicians (Beveridge & Ducharme, 1997; Canadian Association for Emergency Physicians [CAEP], 2002). Both the National Emergency Nurses' Affiliation, Inc. (NENA) and the Canadian Association for Emergency Physicians (CAEP) have recognized CTAS as the national benchmark for emergency department triage. Canadian hospitals are mandated to report data, including CTAS scores, for all emergency department visits to the Canadian government. Research has also demonstrated that the Canadian five-level scale provides strong interrater reliability when clinicians assess the severity of written scenarios based on real patient cases.

##### History of the Emergency Severity Index (ESI)

The Emergency Severity Index (ESI) is a five-level triage system created by emergency department physicians Richard Wuerz and David Eitel in the United States (Gilboy et al., 1999; Wuerz, Milne, Eitel, Travers & Gilboy, 2000). The founders believed that a key function of an emergency department triage tool is to help prioritize patients according to the urgency of their conditions. Triage nurses assess priority by asking, “Who should be seen first?” However, Drs. Wuerz and Eitel recognized that when multiple high-priority patients arrive at the same time, the question shifts to, “How long can each patient safely wait?” The ESI was designed based on a new approach to ED triage. Beyond determining which patient needs immediate attention, triage nurses using the ESI also evaluate what resources are required to move the patient toward an ED outcome. The ESI maintains the traditional focus on patient urgency, but also aims to achieve a second objective: not only sorting patients, but also directing them to the appropriate resources, ensuring the right patient receives the right care at the right time and place.

The initial version (v. 1) of the ESI was first put into practice at two university-affiliated emergency departments in the spring of 1999. By fall 2000, the ESI was updated with input from emergency department clinicians to add triage criteria for pediatric patients, and this second version (v. 2) was then introduced in five more hospitals, including both non-university teaching and community hospitals. Drawing on feedback from nurses and physicians at these locations, as well as the best scientific evidence available, the ESI was further updated to version 3 (v. 3) in 2001 (Wuerz et al., 2001). More recently, additional changes have been made to the tool, which is now presented in this edition of the ESI handbook as version 4 (v. 4) (Tanabe et al., in press).

Emergency physicians and nurses in the United States and Canada have carried out multiple research studies evaluating the reliability and validity of the ESI. The ESI has been directly compared with traditional three-level triage systems as well as the five-level CTAS. These studies will be discussed later in the chapter. Similar to the Australasian, Canadian, and U.K. systems, the ESI triage system consists of five levels. However, it differs in both its conceptual framework and practical use. The triage systems from Australia, Canada, and the U.K. are based on the idea that triage is meant to determine how long a patient can safely wait for care in the emergency department, with specific definitions for the time to physician assessment included in their protocols. This is a key distinction between ESI and both CTAS and the ATS, as ESI does not specify expected time frames for physician evaluation.

The ESI stands out because it requires the triage nurse to predict the resources a patient will need—such as diagnostic tests and procedures—in addition to assessing acuity, in order to assign a triage category for patients who are less critically ill. Figure 2-1 presents the ESI triage levels. Later chapters will explain in detail how to use the ESI to categorize emergency department patients. In summary, the process begins with evaluating acuity by considering the stability of the patient’s vital signs and the risk of an immediate threat to life or organs. For patients who are stable, the nurse then estimates the resources likely needed to reach a disposition in the emergency department, based on their professional judgment. These resource requirements can vary from none to two or more.

##### Research on the Emergency Severity Index

In a preliminary study evaluating ESI v.1 ratings for 493 triage cases at two Boston hospitals in 1998, researchers determined that the system was both reliable and valid (Wuerz et al., 2000). During the study, patients were triaged at the same time by the triage nurse using the standard three-level scale and by a research nurse applying the first version of the ESI. Afterwards, an investigator, who was unaware of the research nurse’s ESI rating, assigned an ESI level based solely on the written triage note. The triage levels showed a strong correlation with the resources utilized in the emergency department and with outcomes like hospital admission. Patients with higher acuity (ESI levels 1 and 2) required more resources and had a greater likelihood of being admitted compared to those with lower acuity (ESI levels 4 and 5). The agreement between the research nurse and the investigator was high, with 77 percent matching exactly and 22 percent differing by only one triage level.

Several studies have assessed the reliability of the ESI by using the kappa statistic to determine inter-rater agreement, where kappa values range from 0 (no agreement) to 1 (perfect agreement). At one of the original ESI sites, a time series design was employed to compare triage reliability using a three-level scale before and after the introduction of ESI v.1 (Travers et al., 2002). The reliability improved, with the weighted kappa increasing from 0.53 with the three-level system to 0.68 with the five-level ESI. Another study investigated the reliability and validity of ESI v.2 during and after its implementation in triage at seven hospitals in the northeast and southeast. Over 200 triage nurses participated in an ESI triage education program, where they rated 40 case studies using the ESI (Eitel et al., 2003). The findings showed substantial inter-rater reliability, with kappa values between 0.70 and 0.80. Additionally, 386 actual patient triage decisions were analyzed, revealing high inter-rater reliability with weighted kappas from 0.69 to 0.87. In a separate study conducted in a Midwestern urban emergency department, researchers assessed the reliability of ESI v.3 for 403 real patient triages and found a kappa of 0.89 (Tanabe, Gimbel, Yarnold, Kyriacou & Adams, 2004).

Researchers from Canada and the United States have directly compared the inter-rater reliability of the ESI and CTAS in a randomized study (Worster et al., 2004). The study involved ten Canadian triage nurses who were experienced with CTAS. These nurses were randomly assigned to receive either ESI version 3 or CTAS refresher training, after which they evaluated 200 case studies using either the ESI or CTAS. Both groups demonstrated excellent inter-rater reliability, with kappa values of 0.89 for ESI and 0.91 for CTAS.

The effectiveness of the ESI has been assessed by analyzing outcomes in several thousand patients. Research has demonstrated consistent and strong associations between the ESI and factors such as hospitalization, emergency department length of stay, and mortality (Eitel et al., 2003; Tanabe et al., 2004; Wuerz, 2001; Wuerz et al., 2001). Additionally, the ESI has shown moderate correlations with physician evaluation and management codes, as well as nursing workload indicators (Travers et al., 2002). The ESI also enables meaningful comparisons of patient case mix across different hospitals. In one study, a stratified random sample of 200 patients was taken from each of the seven original ESI hospitals to compare case mix (Eitel et al., 2003). As anticipated, tertiary care centers had a greater proportion of high-acuity patients, while community hospitals had more patients requiring fewer resources.

A survey conducted among nursing staff at the two initial university teaching hospitals found that the response to the ESI implementation was favorable (Wuerz et al., 2001). Nurses indicated that the ESI was simpler to use and more effective for prioritizing patients for care compared to the previous three-level systems used at those locations.

In the latest ESI study, the accuracy of ESI level 2 was closely analyzed (Tanabe et al., in press). Reviewing the outcomes of 571 ESI level-2 patients across five hospitals, researchers discovered that 20 percent of these patients required immediate, life-saving treatment. The study’s authors suggested that these individuals should be categorized as ESI level 1. The revised ESI version 4, discussed in later chapters of this book, incorporates changes to the ESI based on these findings.

##### Benefits of the Emergency Severity Index

The ESI has been adopted by hospitals across various regions, including both university and community hospitals, as well as teaching and nonteaching facilities. Clinicians, managers, and researchers in these emergency departments have recognized several advantages of ESI triage compared to traditional three-level systems. One key advantage is the ability to quickly identify patients who require immediate care. ESI triage emphasizes the efficient categorization of patients, especially when resources are limited. In some ways, ESI triage returns to the original intent of triage as established during Napoleon’s era. It involves rapidly sorting patients into five categories, each with significant differences in anticipated resource needs and corresponding operational requirements. Utilizing ESI for this swift categorization can enhance patient flow through the emergency department. After an ESI triage level is determined, patients can be directed to further assessment, registration, initial treatment, or the waiting area, depending on their severity and expected resource use. For instance, patients classified as level 1 or 2 can be taken straight to the treatment area for prompt evaluation and care, while those at levels 4 and 5 may proceed to registration and then wait for an available bed.

A key concern separate from ESI triage is when to perform a full nursing assessment. Many experts argue that a comprehensive assessment does not need to take place at the initial triage station, but can instead be completed in the main treatment area or a secondary triage area, depending on each patient’s needs and the current workload in the emergency department (Gilboy et al., 1999). At triage, only the evaluation necessary to assign an ESI level is required to help with the initial sorting of patients. Full clinical assessments are time-consuming, and conducting them at triage can delay care and lower satisfaction for patients with less severe conditions. As patient numbers and case complexity rise, leading to ED crowding, it is necessary to rethink traditional care processes to improve efficiency and effectiveness. Nevertheless, it remains essential to gather enough information to accurately determine the appropriate triage category. This is particularly important when patients face long waits to see a physician, which is common with higher patient volumes. Triage has become even more vital as waiting room times increase. Assigning a patient to an inappropriately low triage category can heighten the risk of poor outcomes due to prolonged waiting times.

Additional advantages of the ESI include its ability to identify patients who do not require care in the main emergency department and can instead be safely and more efficiently managed in a fast-track or urgent care setting. For instance, in many hospitals, triage guidelines specify that all ESI level 4 and 5 patients may be directed to either medical urgent care or minor trauma sections of the ED. The policy also permits certain level-3 patients, such as those needing straightforward migraine treatment, to be sent to urgent care. ESI level-3 patients assigned to urgent care, as well as any patients transferred from urgent care to the acute area for more serious issues, are tracked through the quality improvement program. Nurses using the ESI have noted that it improves communication about patient acuity compared to the previous three-level triage systems used at these facilities (Wuerz et al., 2001). For example, a triage nurse can simply state, “I need a bed for a level 2 patient,” and the charge nurse immediately understands the urgency without needing a detailed patient description.

The ESI has also served as the basis for emergency department policies targeting certain groups. For instance, at one location, the psychiatric team is required to provide consultations for level 2 and 3 patients within 30 minutes, and for level 4 and 5 patients within an hour of being notified. At another facility, the ESI is part of a policy for patients over 20 weeks pregnant who come to the ED. Patients assigned ESI levels 1 and 2 receive care in the ED by emergency medicine staff with an obstetric consultation, while those at levels 3, 4, or 5 are directed to the hospital’s labor and delivery unit.

The ESI is also an effective method for setting thresholds to divert ambulance patients away from the ED. At Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston, the ED Diversion Policy and Guidelines define full capacity as all RN-staffed ED beds being occupied. The ESI is utilized to assess when the department is over capacity.

Studies have demonstrated that the ESI is a dependable and accurate method for assessing triage acuity. This system has been implemented in numerous emergency departments across various regions of the United States, including both academic and community hospitals. These institutions have shown that using the ESI enhances emergency department efficiency and patient care. Broader use of the ESI in U.S. hospitals could help create a standardized approach to triage acuity assessment, supporting benchmarking, public health monitoring, and research efforts.

### Chapter 3. Introduction to the Emergency Severity Index

The Emergency Severity Index (ESI) is an easy-to-use, five-level triage tool that classifies emergency department patients by assessing both the severity of their condition and the resources they will require. The triage nurse first evaluates the patient’s acuity. If the patient does not qualify for the highest acuity levels (ESI level 1 or 2), the nurse then considers the anticipated resource needs to assign a triage level (ESI level 3, 4, or 5). Unlike other triage systems, the ESI uniquely incorporates resource requirements into its assessment. Acuity is judged based on the stability of vital signs and the risk to life, limb, or organ function. The nurse predicts resource needs by drawing on experience with patients who have similar symptoms or injuries. Resource needs refer to the number of interventions or services a patient is likely to need before a decision about their care can be made. Once familiar with the ESI algorithm, the triage nurse can quickly and accurately assign patients to one of five clearly defined, non-overlapping categories. The ESI offers emergency departments a reliable and valid method for triage (Eitel, Travers, Rosenau, Gilboy & Wuerz, 2003; Travers, Waller, Bowling, Flowers & Tintinalli, 2002; Wuerz, Travers, Gilboy, Eitel, Rosenau & Yazhari, 2001; Tanabe, Gimbel, Yarnold, Kyriacou, & Adams, 2004; Tanabe, Gimbel, Yarnold, & Adams, 2004).

This chapter offers a detailed, step-by-step guide to triaging using the ESI algorithm. Later chapters delve deeper into essential concepts and include many examples to illustrate the nuances of applying ESI.

Algorithms are commonly utilized in emergency care settings. Many emergency healthcare providers are acquainted with the algorithms taught in programs like Basic Life Support, Advanced Cardiac Life Support, and the Trauma Nursing Core Course. These programs offer a systematic, stepwise method for making clinical decisions, which clinicians can master through repeated practice. At each stage, the algorithm guides the user on which questions to pose or what information to collect. Depending on the responses or data gathered, a decision is reached, and the algorithm leads the user to the subsequent step, eventually resulting in an outcome.

Using the ESI algorithm for triage requires an experienced emergency department nurse to begin at the top of the algorithm. Figure 3-1 provides a conceptual summary of the ESI algorithm, highlighting its key decision points. A more detailed explanation of the actual ESI algorithm is given later in the chapter (see Figure 3-1a). The algorithm involves four decision points (A, B, C, and D) to categorize patients into one of five triage levels (refer to Figure 3-1). With experience, the triage nurse will be able to quickly progress through each ESI decision point.

##### Decision Point A: Is the Patient Dying?

In simple terms, at decision point A (Figure 3-2), the triage nurse determines whether the patient is dying. If the response is “yes,” the triage process ends there, and the patient is immediately assigned to ESI level 1. If the answer is “no,” the process continues to the next step in the algorithm, decision point B.

The question below helps assess if the patient is at risk of dying (conceptual algorithm): Does the patient need an urgent life-saving intervention? The subsequent questions assist in evaluating whether the patient fulfills level-1 criteria:

Does the patient need urgent airway management, medication, or another hemodynamic intervention?

Does the patient exhibit any of the following: current intubation, absence of breathing, lack of pulse, significant respiratory distress, oxygen saturation below 90 percent, sudden changes in mental status, or unresponsiveness?

Studies have shown that triage nurses can reliably anticipate when immediate interventions are necessary (Tanabe et al., in press). For ESI triage, Table 3-1 outlines which interventions are classified as life-saving and which are not.

Interventions that are not classified as life-saving may include certain diagnostic or therapeutic procedures, but do not involve actions that would directly “save a life.” Life-saving interventions focus on ensuring an open airway, sustaining breathing, or supporting circulation. The following questions may assist in assessing whether a patient needs a life-saving intervention.

Is this patient's airway open and unobstructed?

Is the patient showing signs of breathing?

Is the patient exhibiting a pulse?

Is the nurse worried about the pulse’s rate, rhythm, and strength?

Was this patient intubated before arriving at the hospital due to worries about their capacity to keep their airway open, breathe on their own, or sustain adequate oxygen levels?

Is the nurse worried about whether this patient can supply enough oxygen to their tissues?

An ESI level-1 patient arrives at the emergency department in a critical, unstable state. Immediate intervention is essential to prevent death, prompting a coordinated team response with the physician present at the bedside and nurses delivering intensive care. These patients receive immediate attention, as prompt treatment can significantly impact their risk of complications or death.

A primary distinction between ESI level-1 and level-2 patients is the necessity for immediate physician involvement in patient care. Level-1 patients are in critical condition and need prompt evaluation and intervention by a physician. In contrast, although level-2 patients are also seriously ill, emergency nurses can begin treatment using established protocols without a physician present. The nurse understands that interventions are required but is assured that the patient’s condition is stable enough not to worsen rapidly. The nurse can start intravenous lines, provide supplemental oxygen, perform an ECG, and connect the patient to a cardiac monitor before a physician is required at the bedside.

When assessing the necessity for urgent lifesaving measures, the triage nurse thoroughly examines the patient’s respiratory condition and oxygen saturation (SpO2) levels. Even if a patient is still breathing, severe respiratory distress or an SpO2 below 90 percent signals the need for prompt action to secure the airway and ensure adequate oxygenation. Such a patient will need the physician present to administer medications for rapid sequence intubation or to initiate other airway and breathing interventions.

Patients experiencing chest pain should also be assessed according to the same standards. Some individuals with chest pain are quite stable and, while they may need a diagnostic ECG, they do not qualify for level-1 criteria. On the other hand, those who appear pale, sweaty, in severe respiratory distress, or are hemodynamically unstable will need urgent, life-saving treatment and do fulfill level-1 criteria. Every patient with chest pain must be evaluated in relation to the level-1 criteria to decide if immediate life-saving intervention is necessary.

When deciding if a patient needs immediate life-saving care, the triage nurse must evaluate the patient’s level of consciousness. The ESI algorithm utilizes the AVPU scale (alert, verbal, pain, unresponsive) as shown in Table 3-2. This step aims to identify patients experiencing a sudden change in consciousness. The nurse should look for deviations from the patient’s baseline, with particular concern for those who were previously alert but are now categorized as P (pain) or U (unresponsive). Unresponsiveness should be considered in the context of sudden neurological changes, and not in patients with pre-existing developmental delays, documented dementia, or aphasia. Any patient who is unresponsive—including those who are intoxicated and do not respond to painful stimuli—meets level-1 criteria and requires immediate assessment. For instance, a patient with a sudden decrease in mental status who cannot maintain their airway or is in severe respiratory distress would need urgent intervention.

Users familiar with ESI version 3 (v. 3) will observe a significant modification in the criteria for ESI level 1. The primary distinction between ESI v. 3 and ESI version 4 (v. 4) is the recognition and reclassification of some of the most critically ill patients who were previously assigned to ESI level 2. Now, patients who need immediate life-saving interventions are designated as ESI level 1. Under the earlier version, a patient experiencing severe respiratory distress who needed intubation but was still breathing would have been placed in ESI level 2. In the new version, this patient now qualifies for level 1. Additional examples of patients now considered ESI level 1 include those who are weak and dizzy with a heart rate of 30 or 200. While this adjustment may not impact a large number of patients, it ensures that the most severely ill are classified correctly. Before v. 4, triage nurses often faced two types of ESI level-2 patients: those needing immediate attention and those who could safely wait a short period (about 10 minutes) without worsening. This issue prompted a large, multi-center, prospective study to determine which ESI level-2 patients actually received immediate interventions (Tanabe et al., in press). Findings from that study led to the revision of the ESI system. This updated ESI handbook outlines these changes and introduces ESI v. 4.

An ESI level-1 patient does not necessarily arrive at the emergency department by ambulance. Individuals with drug overdoses or acute alcohol intoxication might be left at the entrance, while children could be brought in by car and carried inside. An experienced triage nurse can quickly recognize these critically ill patients. With a swift, visual assessment from a distance, the triage nurse identifies those in severe distress. These patients are promptly moved to the treatment area, where resuscitation begins immediately.

Patients classified as ESI level 1 make up about 1 to 3 percent of all emergency department cases (Eitel et al., 2003; Wuerz, Milne, Eitel, Travers & Gilboy, 2000; Wuerz et al., 2001). These patients require immediate resuscitation by either the emergency physician and nurse or the trauma or code team upon arrival. Research on ESI indicates that the majority of ESI level-1 patients are admitted to intensive care units, while some die in the emergency department (Eitel et al., 2003; Wuerz, 2001). A small number of ESI level-1 patients are discharged from the ED if their altered level of consciousness or vital functions—such as those caused by hypoglycemia, seizures, alcohol intoxication, or anaphylaxis—are reversible.

Illustrations of ESI level 1:

Heart stoppage.

Cessation of breathing.

Acute difficulty breathing.

Oxygen saturation below 90%.

Severely injured trauma patient arriving in an unresponsive state.

Overdose presenting with a respiratory rate of 6.

Three general questions are utilized to assess if the patient satisfies level-2 criteria.

Is this considered a high-risk scenario?

2. Does the patient exhibit confusion, lethargy, or disorientation?

3. Is the patient experiencing significant pain or discomfort?

The triage nurse gathers relevant subjective and objective data to promptly address these questions. This section provides a concise overview of ESI level-2 criteria, with a more comprehensive discussion of patients qualifying for ESI level-2 to be covered in Chapter 4.

Severe difficulty breathing accompanied by agonal or gasping breaths.

Markedly slow or rapid heart rate accompanied by evidence of inadequate tissue perfusion.

Low blood pressure accompanied by indications of inadequate tissue perfusion.

A trauma patient in need of urgent resuscitation with crystalloids and colloids.

Experiencing chest pain, appearing pale and sweaty, with a blood pressure of 70 by palpation.

Feeling faint and lightheaded, heart rate is 30.

Severe allergic response.

Infant exhibiting limpness.

Unconscious with a strong smell of alcohol.

Low blood sugar accompanied by altered mental state.

##### Decision Point B: Should the Patient Wait?

After the triage nurse establishes that the patient does not qualify for ESI level 1, they proceed to decision point B (refer to Figure 33). At this stage, the nurse must determine if the patient can safely wait to be evaluated. If waiting is not appropriate, the patient is assigned ESI level 2. If the patient can wait, the process continues to the following step in the algorithm.

###### Is This a High-risk Situation?

Drawing on a brief patient interview, general observations, and the intuition developed through experience, the triage nurse identifies patients at high risk. Often, factors such as the patient’s age and medical history play a role in this assessment. A high-risk patient is someone whose condition could quickly worsen or who shows symptoms indicating a need for urgent, time-sensitive care. This type of patient may face a significant threat to life or organ function. In most cases, a comprehensive physical exam or a complete set of vital signs is not necessary to recognize high risk. Instead, the patient may describe symptoms that an experienced triage nurse immediately recognizes as concerning. For instance, if a patient says, “I never get headaches and after lifting something heavy, I now have the worst headache of my life,” the triage nurse would assign an ESI level 2, as these symptoms could indicate a subarachnoid hemorrhage.

If a patient is classified as ESI level 2, the triage nurse has determined that it is not safe for them to wait in the waiting area for any period of time. Although ESI guidelines do not specify exact time frames, patients at ESI level 2 are a high priority and should typically be placed and begin receiving treatment within 10 minutes of their arrival. It is crucial to note that even though the criteria for level 1 have broadened in version 4 of the algorithm, ESI level 2 patients are still regarded as very ill and at significant risk. Immediate care is necessary, and a suitable bed must be located right away. In most cases, instead of moving on to the next patient, the triage nurse recognizes the severity of the situation and promptly notifies the charge nurse or staff in the patient care area that there is an ESI level 2 patient.

Instances of high-risk scenarios:

Experiencing ongoing chest pain suggestive of coronary syndrome, stable condition, and does not need urgent life-saving treatment.

A healthcare worker experiences a needlestick injury.

Shows symptoms of a stroke, but does not fulfill level-1 requirements.

Ectopic pregnancy has been ruled out; the patient is hemodynamically stable.

A patient undergoing chemotherapy, and thus immunosuppressed, presenting with a fever.

A patient exhibiting suicidal or homicidal tendencies.

Chapter 4 provides further details about high-risk situations.

###### Is the Patient Confused, Lethargic, or Disoriented?

This is the second question to consider at decision point B. Once more, the focus is on determining if the patient is experiencing a sudden change in consciousness. Patients who are normally confused do not qualify for level-2 criteria.

Confused: Shows unsuitable reactions to stimuli, with reduced attention span and impaired memory.

Lethargic: Sleepy, experiencing increased sleep, but reacts suitably when prompted.

Disoriented: The patient cannot accurately respond to questions regarding time, location, or identity.

Instances of patients who exhibit confusion, lethargy, or disorientation:

Recent development of confusion in an older patient.

A 3-month-old infant whose mother reports that the baby is constantly sleeping.

The teenager was discovered in a state of confusion and disorientation.

All of these examples suggest that the brain could be impaired either in its structure or its chemistry.

###### Is This Patient in Severe Pain or Distress?

At decision point B, the triage nurse’s third question is whether the patient is experiencing pain or distress. If the answer is “no,” the nurse proceeds to the next step in the process. If the answer is “yes,” the nurse must evaluate the severity of the pain or distress. This assessment is based on clinical observation and/or the patient’s self-reported pain score of 7 or above on a 0 to 10 scale. When a patient reports pain at 7/10 or higher, the nurse may assign an ESI level 2, but this is not mandatory. Pain is a frequent reason for emergency department visits, and not all patients with pain scores of 7/10 or more require an ESI level-2 classification. For instance, a patient with a sprained ankle and pain rated at 8/10 would typically be considered ESI level 4. Assigning a level 2 rating based solely on pain is not necessary in such cases.

In certain patients, pain can be evaluated through clinical observation, such as noting distressed facial expressions, sweating, body posture, and alterations in vital signs. The triage nurse looks for physical signs of acute pain that validate the patient’s reported pain level. For instance, a patient experiencing abdominal pain who is sweating, has a rapid heart rate, and elevated blood pressure, or a patient with intense flank pain, vomiting, pale skin, and a history of kidney stones, are both clear examples of individuals who qualify for ESI level-2. More details about ESI level 2 and pain assessment can be found in Chapter 4.

Severe distress may be either physical or mental. Instances of distress include a victim of sexual assault, an aggressive patient, or a person with bipolar disorder experiencing a manic episode.

ESI level-2 patients represent a relatively small but high-risk segment, making up 20 to 30 percent of emergency department visits (Travers et al., 2002; Wuerz et al., 2001; Tanabe, Gimbel et al., 2004). After identifying an ESI level-2 patient, the triage nurse must ensure prompt care. Registration can be handled by a family member or completed at the bedside. These patients require vital signs and a thorough nursing assessment, though this does not have to occur during triage. Patient placement should not be postponed to complete vital sign collection. Studies on ESI have found that 50 to 60 percent of ESI level-2 patients are admitted from the emergency department (Wuerz et al., 2001).

##### Decision Point C: Resource Needs

If the responses to the first two decision points are “no,” the triage nurse proceeds to decision point C (refer to Figure 3-4). At this stage, the nurse should inquire, “How many different resources will this patient likely require for the physician to make a disposition decision?” Possible dispositions include discharging the patient home, admitting them to the observation unit or hospital, or transferring them to another facility. This step again calls for the triage nurse to rely on previous experience with similar emergency department cases. It is important for ED nurses to recognize that estimating resource needs is based on standards of care and is not influenced by the hospital’s type (teaching or non-teaching) or its location. Any patient arriving at an emergency department should generally utilize the same resources to reach a disposition. Taking into account the patient’s brief subjective and objective evaluation, medical history, allergies, medications, age, and gender, the nurse must determine how many different resources will be necessary for the physician to decide on a disposition. Essentially, what is the usual protocol for a patient presenting to the ED with this typical complaint? The triage nurse should make this judgment based on their assessment of the patient, focusing on standard practices in the specific ED rather than individual provider preferences.

To determine what resources are needed, the triage nurse should understand the standards of care in the emergency department. The nurse must also be aware of the idea of “prudent and customary.” An effective way to approach this is to consider, “Based on this patient’s main complaint or injury, what resources will the emergency physician probably use?” Resources may include hospital services, diagnostic tests, procedures, consultations, or interventions that go beyond the physician’s history and physical exam, as well as basic emergency department actions like applying a bandage. Additional details and examples can be found in Chapter 5.

Table 3-3 outlines what qualifies and does not qualify as a resource for ESI triage classification. Patients at ESI level 3 are expected to need two or more resources, those at ESI level 4 are anticipated to need one resource, and ESI level 5 patients are expected to need no resources, as shown in Table 3-4.

Studies indicate that ESI level-3 patients account for 30% to 40% of those treated in the emergency department (Eitel et al., 2003; Wuerz et al., 2001). These individuals typically need more comprehensive assessments but are considered stable in the short term, which can result in longer ED stays. ESI level 4 and 5 patients represent 20% to 35% of emergency department visits, and this percentage may be higher in areas with limited access to primary care. Properly trained mid-level providers with suitable skill sets could manage these patients in a fast-track or express care environment, especially since many present with trauma-related issues. Given their stable condition, it is safe for these patients to wait several hours before being seen.

##### Decision Point D:The Patient's Vital Signs

Prior to assigning a patient to ESI level 3, the nurse must review the patient’s vital signs to determine if they fall outside the normal range for the patient’s age and if these abnormalities are clinically significant. If the vital signs are abnormal, the triage nurse should consider elevating the triage level to ESI level 2. Ultimately, it is up to the triage nurse to decide whether the patient should be upgraded to ESI level 2 due to abnormal vital signs. This is referred to as decision point D.

Vital sign parameters vary by age (refer to Figure 3-5). The vital signs considered include pulse, respiratory rate, and oxygen saturation, with body temperature also assessed in children under three years old. Based on these criteria, a triage nurse may decide to upgrade an adult patient with a heart rate of 104, or keep them at ESI level 3. Similarly, a 6-month-old infant with a cold and a respiratory rate of 48 might be assigned to ESI level 2 or 3. The nurse must determine, using the patient’s history and physical exam, whether the vital signs indicate a high enough risk that the patient should not wait to be evaluated. Chapter 6 provides a detailed discussion of vital signs and includes examples.

Temperature is considered only for children younger than three years old. A high fever may prevent young children from being placed in categories 4 and 5. This approach helps to identify children who may have bacteremia and ensures they are not directed to a fast track area or made to wait for an extended period. Detailed pediatric fever guidelines will be provided in Chapter 6.

###### Does Time to Treatment Influence ESI Triage Categories?

Estimating how long a patient can wait before being seen by a doctor is a key part of most triage systems. The Australasian and Canadian Triage Systems specify that patients must be evaluated by a physician within a set timeframe according to their triage level. In contrast, the ESI does not set strict time requirements for physician assessment. Nonetheless, patients classified as ESI level 2 should receive prompt attention, though the exact timing is determined by each institution’s policy. There is often confusion between institutional policies, the actual process of patient care, and the ESI triage level.

We will present four patient cases where there may appear to be a contradiction between patient flow and triage category. Trauma patients often arrive at triage after experiencing a significant injury mechanism, such as being an unrestrained passenger in a high-speed car accident. Sometimes, these patients do not arrive by ambulance but come to triage on their own, reporting localized right upper quadrant pain and having stable vital signs. Although this patient is physiologically stable, walked into the emergency department, and does not meet the criteria for ESI level 1, they are still at high risk for injuries like a liver laceration and other serious trauma, so they should be assigned ESI level 2. Many emergency departments have trauma protocols and trauma response levels that require prompt initiation of care. Both triage level and trauma response level are important and should be documented as separate scores. While the triage nurse correctly identifies this as a physiologically stable trauma patient and assigns ESI level 2, she should also ensure the patient is placed and managed according to trauma policy. The patient is likely stable for at least another 10 minutes and does not need immediate life-saving measures. However, if the same patient arrived with a palpable blood pressure of 80, they would be classified as ESI level 1 and would need urgent, life-saving hemodynamic interventions.

Another instance of policies influencing triage levels involves patients presenting with stable chest pain. If a patient is physiologically stable but has chest pain that could indicate an acute coronary syndrome, they qualify for ESI level-2. These patients do not need immediate life-saving measures but are considered high-risk and require prompt attention. An ECG should be completed within 10 minutes of arrival, and many emergency departments have protocols to ensure rapid ECG initiation. Although care for these patients should begin quickly, the ECG itself is a diagnostic tool, not a life-saving intervention. If all patients with chest pain were assigned ESI level-1, it would make it challenging to prioritize those who truly need immediate life-saving care. However, a chest pain patient who arrives at triage sweating and with a palpable blood pressure of 80 would meet ESI level-1 criteria.

A third instance of time-critical care involves patients showing symptoms of an acute stroke. If the patient is physiologically stable, a delay of 10 minutes before starting treatment is unlikely to worsen their condition. On the other hand, a stroke patient who cannot maintain their airway qualifies for ESI level 1.

In another scenario, an elderly patient who has fallen and may have a hip fracture arrives with family by private car and is experiencing significant pain. Although the patient does not strictly qualify for ESI level 2, they are clearly uncomfortable. The triage nurse would assign an ESI level 3 and likely prioritize placing the patient in a bed ahead of other ESI level 3 cases. Similar situations can occur with patients arriving by ambulance. However, arriving by ambulance alone does not justify assigning ESI level 1 or 2. Triage level should always be determined using ESI criteria, regardless of how the patient arrived.

Overall, care for ESI level-2 patients should be expedited, with the goal of having them in the treatment area within 10 minutes. It is crucial to note that although ESI version 4 has broadened level-1 criteria to include patients needing immediate interventions who were previously classified as level 2, all level-2 patients remain potentially very ill and need prompt assessment and care. The triage nurse has determined that it is unsafe for these patients to wait. While they may appear stable at present, their condition could quickly worsen, and timely diagnostic or therapeutic interventions may be critical (for example, a stable patient with chest pain should receive an ECG within 10 minutes of arrival), or they may face a possible major threat to life or organ function. ESI level-2 patients are still regarded as being at very high risk.

Given the current issue of ED overcrowding, it is common for triage nurses to encounter multiple ESI level-2 patients when there are no available ED beds. In these circumstances, there may be a temptation to “undertriage,” which can result in significant harm to patients and inaccurately reflect the ED’s patient population. When several ESI level-2 patients arrive at the same time, the triage nurse should assess each one using the ESI algorithm. This allows the nurse to prioritize among the level-2 patients, identifying those at greatest risk and arranging placement accordingly.

##### Summary

In conclusion, the ESI is a straightforward five-level triage system that categorizes patients according to the severity of their condition and the resources they require. The ESI triage process relies on four main decision points. With this system, an experienced emergency department nurse can quickly and accurately assess and prioritize patients.

### Chapter 4. ESI Level 2

This chapter builds upon the initial overview of the ESI, emphasizing the importance of the experienced ED nurse’s clinical judgment. The ESI triage training program should allocate significant time to clarifying which patients qualify for ESI level 2. Here, we focus on typical patient scenarios that fulfill the criteria for ESI level 2.

Once the triage nurse has established that the patient does not need urgent life-saving care, the next step is to assess whether the patient can wait. In making this judgment, the triage nurse should ask, “Would I allocate my last available bed to this patient?” The three questions outlined in Figure 4-1 must be addressed, as they are essential elements of the ESI level-2 criteria.

Is this considered a high-risk scenario?

Is the patient showing signs of recent confusion, drowsiness, or disorientation?

3. Is the patient in significant pain or discomfort?

The rest of this chapter explores the decision-making aspects of ESI level 2 in depth. Numerous examples are included, illustrating potential medical diagnoses linked to patients’ chief complaints and symptoms. An experienced triage nurse will always evaluate the patient’s main complaint, observed signs and symptoms, demographic information, and medical history to help identify high-risk situations. Although the goal of nurse triage is not to establish a medical diagnosis, these scenarios rely on the triage nurse’s expertise regarding possible diagnoses related to specific complaints. Comprehensive resources on the signs and symptoms of various medical conditions include the Emergency Nursing Core Curriculum[©] and other emergency nursing reference books. The following section highlights selected examples of high-risk situations, though it is not meant to be all-inclusive. These examples are summarized in Table 4-1.

##### High-risk Situations

Recognizing high-risk situations is essential in the triage decision-making process, no matter which triage system is applied. The ESI emphasizes the significance of identifying high-risk cases and relies on the triage nurse’s knowledge and experience to determine which patients are at increased risk.

There is limited literature on how emergency department (ED) triage nurses make decisions. While knowledge and experience are essential, they are not enough on their own. Another crucial element is intuition or a “sixth sense.” Novice triage nurses should be taught practical guidelines, or rules of thumb, to rely on until they gain the confidence and experience needed for quick, accurate decision-making. Examples of such guidelines include “assume all women of childbearing age are pregnant until proven otherwise” or “consider all chest pain as cardiac in origin until proven otherwise.” New triage nurses also learn to recognize symptom clusters, such as the cardiac cluster of chest pain, nausea, shortness of breath, and sweating. Through previous clinical experiences, ED nurses develop what are called clinical portraits—memories of specific patient cases they have encountered. For instance, a nurse will always recall a patient with fever, stiff neck, and a meningococcal rash when seeing a similar case in the future. With each triage situation, nurses must draw upon all their knowledge and experience. Experienced triage nurses should be able to easily recognize high-risk situations.

Vital signs alone are often insufficient for identifying patients at high risk. Patients usually arrive at the emergency department with a main complaint, symptoms, or a history that points to a potentially serious issue which can worsen quickly if not addressed immediately. Factors such as the patient’s age, medical history, and current medications often affect how severe the main complaint appears. For instance, an elderly, frail individual with intense abdominal pain faces a much greater risk of complications or death compared to a healthy 20-year-old. The older patient with abdominal pain should be assigned an ESI level 2, while the younger adult with stable vital signs is typically given an ESI level 3. Triage nurses frequently recognize high-risk cases, which may then be supported by abnormal vital signs. For example, a patient reporting fever and a productive cough might have a respiratory rate of 32 and an oxygen saturation of 90 percent. An experienced triage nurse can use their knowledge to determine that this patient likely has pneumonia, is at risk for further oxygen desaturation, and is therefore high risk. In contrast, less experienced emergency department nurses may lack the necessary skills to reliably identify high-risk situations and make correct triage decisions. As a result, an inexperienced triage nurse can be a liability, regardless of the triage system in place. They have not yet developed the ability to use symptom patterns, clinical scenarios, or intuition—methods that are essential for recognizing high-risk patients. The following section will outline specific examples of high-risk situations.

###### Abdominal and Gastrointestinal

Abdominal pain is a common reason for visits to the emergency department. What factors make it high risk? Taking a thorough history and evaluating the current pain level, respiratory rate, and heart rate are key components that help identify high-risk cases. Pain severity is just one aspect to consider. If severe abdominal pain is accompanied by tachycardia or respiratory distress, this may indicate shock and puts the patient at higher risk. Elderly patients with severe abdominal pain are also at increased risk, as they are more likely to suffer from bowel obstructions, gastrointestinal bleeding, and other abdominal issues that carry greater morbidity and mortality compared to younger individuals. It is crucial to look for signs and symptoms of an acute abdomen in all patients presenting with abdominal pain. Important questions include: How long has the pain been present? What prompted the patient to seek emergency care today? Has the patient experienced severe nausea, vomiting, or diarrhea? Is there evidence of dehydration? Patients who report severe, “ripping” abdominal pain that radiates to the back should be evaluated for a possible abdominal aortic aneurysm. This pain is typically described as severe, constant, and of sudden onset, and these patients may have a history of hypertension.

Patients presenting with abdominal pain are frequently assigned an ESI level 3 at the start of the triage assessment, but if tachycardia or additional risk factors are identified, the triage nurse may conclude that the patient is actually at high risk.

Vomiting blood or presenting with blood per rectum requires careful assessment, taking vital signs into account. A 30-year-old with bright red rectal bleeding, stable vital signs, and no additional risk factors does not qualify for ESI level 2. However, an older adult who called emergency services due to vomiting blood and has a heart rate of 117 and a respiratory rate of 24 is considered high risk and does meet the criteria for ESI level 2.

###### Cardiovascular

Chest pain is a frequent reason for seeking medical care. The symptoms of acute coronary syndromes (ACS) can be vague, making it challenging to assess ACS risk during triage. Patients experiencing chest or epigastric discomfort, with or without other symptoms, typically require a prompt ECG to check for ACS and should be considered high risk—classified as ESI level 2. Triage nurses must be aware of how heart disease can present differently, especially in women. For instance, a 54-year-old obese woman presenting to the emergency department with epigastric pain and fatigue is at risk for ACS and should be assigned to ESI level 2 as high risk. Patients with chest pain who are unstable and need immediate interventions like intubation or hemodynamic support should be triaged as ESI level 1. Not all patients with chest pain fall into level 1 or 2 categories; for example, a healthy 20-year-old with chest pain, cough, and a fever of 101°F is at low risk for ACS and does not meet ESI level 1 or 2 criteria. Each case must be evaluated individually. Other high-risk cardiovascular conditions include possible hypertensive emergencies, acute arterial occlusions, and patients presenting with fever after valve replacement surgery.

###### Dental, Ear, Nose, and Throat

While less frequent, epiglottitis still occurs and poses a possible threat to the airway. Peritonsillar abscess is another condition that can potentially compromise the airway, and both are considered high-risk situations. If a patient with either condition is at immediate risk of airway obstruction and needs urgent intervention, they meet level-1 criteria. For patients presenting with epistaxis, the triage nurse should check blood pressure, even though this step is not included in the ESI algorithm. Causes of epistaxis may include a posterior nosebleed from a hypertensive crisis, nose picking in a patient taking Coumadin®, or recent cocaine use. Regardless of the cause, these patients should be assigned ESI level 2, as they are considered high-risk.

###### Environmental

Individuals with inhalation injuries are at elevated risk for airway obstruction. If a patient exhibits marked airway distress necessitating urgent intervention, they fulfill level-1 criteria.

###### Facial

Individuals who have sustained facial trauma need to be assessed for potential facial fractures. Such fractures frequently occur alongside other serious injuries and can result in airway obstruction, making it essential to classify these cases as high risk. If facial trauma leads to actual airway compromise, it should be assigned an ESI level 1 to prioritize airway intervention. Cases with a significant risk of airway compromise should be categorized as ESI level 2.

###### General Medical

A number of other general medical issues should be evaluated for potential high-risk scenarios. These complications include diabetic ketoacidosis, abnormal blood sugar levels (either high or low), sepsis, episodes of fainting or near-fainting, and various electrolyte imbalances that may require urgent intervention. Hyperkalemia, in particular, poses a significant risk as it can cause dangerous heart rhythm disturbances. This condition should be considered in dialysis patients who present with weakness. Additionally, cancer patients receiving chemotherapy who develop a fever are at increased risk for sepsis and must be recognized as high-risk and assessed promptly.

###### Genitourinary

Men experiencing testicular torsion typically report intense pain, are readily identifiable, and need prompt assessment, surgical treatment, and immediate pain management. Patients on renal dialysis who cannot finish their treatment also represent a high-risk genitourinary emergency due to the potential for multiple electrolyte imbalances. Both women and, more frequently, men may arrive at triage with sudden urinary retention. Men over 65 often present with benign prostatic hypertrophy leading to an inability to urinate. Both genders may also be unable to void following surgery. These individuals are in significant distress and require urgent urinary catheterization. Such cases involve patients in severe distress and should be assigned an ESI level 2.

###### Mental Health

Patients presenting with mental health issues are considered high risk if they pose a threat to themselves, others, or their surroundings. Those who are suicidal, homicidal, psychotic, violent, or at risk of fleeing should be classified as high risk. Intoxication alone, without evidence of trauma or risk of aspiration, does not qualify as high risk. However, intoxicated patients should be thoroughly evaluated for any signs of trauma or behavioral problems linked to alcohol use or their medical history. If such factors are present, the situation may be high risk, and the patient should be assigned an ESI level 2.

###### Neurological

Patients experiencing severe headaches along with changes in mental status, elevated blood pressure, lethargy, fever, or a rash should be regarded as high risk. Additionally, any individual who suddenly develops speech difficulties or motor weakness should be classified as ESI level 2. These symptoms may indicate an acute stroke, making prompt assessment essential. The time since symptom onset is a key consideration in selecting treatment options, especially for fibrinolytic or other interventions. If a patient with no prior history of headaches arrives at the emergency department with a sudden headache, they should be considered at high risk for a subarachnoid hemorrhage. Such patients often recall exactly what they were doing when the headache started, commonly after activities like lifting, having a bowel movement, or sexual activity.

###### Obstetrical and Gynecological

Women presenting with abdominal pain or vaginal bleeding should be thoroughly evaluated, and vital signs should be recorded unless there is an immediate life-threatening condition. For all women of reproductive age, it is essential to determine pregnancy status and the date of the last menstrual period. The triage nurse should look for symptoms of abruptio placentae and placenta previa in women who are in late pregnancy. In early pregnancy, assessment should focus on identifying signs of ectopic pregnancy and spontaneous abortion. Pregnant patients who are between 14 and 20 weeks gestation or further along should be promptly evaluated by a physician, following the specific guidelines of the institution. Postpartum women who report heavy vaginal bleeding should also receive urgent medical attention from a physician. Any woman, whether pregnant or postpartum, who exhibits significant hemodynamic instability and requires immediate life-saving measures should be assigned an ESI level 1 during triage.

###### Ocular

Patients who experience eye trauma, sudden partial or complete vision loss, or chemical exposure to the eye are at significant risk for lasting eye damage and should be assigned an ESI level 2 triage. Visual loss can be caused by conditions such as central retinal artery occlusion, acute narrow-angle glaucoma, and retinal detachment. Eye injuries may lead to globe rupture or hyphema. Chemical exposures, especially from alkali substances, require prompt irrigation to minimize corneal injury. Each of these situations demands urgent assessment and intervention to avoid further harm or worsening of the condition. These cases fulfill the requirements for ESI level 2. Although immediate eye irrigation is crucial, it is not classified as a life-saving measure, so these patients do not qualify for ESI level 1.

###### Orthopedic

Patients exhibiting signs and symptoms of compartment syndrome face a significant risk of losing the affected limb and should be categorized as ESI level 2. Other orthopedic injuries considered high-risk include any limb injury with impaired neurovascular status, partial or complete amputations, or injuries resulting from mechanisms known to be high-risk, such as severe acceleration or deceleration. Patients suspected of having fractures of the pelvis, femur, or hip, as well as those with other limb dislocations, require thorough assessment and monitoring of vital signs. These types of fractures can lead to substantial blood loss. If a patient is hemodynamically unstable and requires immediate life-saving intervention, they should be classified as ESI level 1.

###### Pediatrics

Triage nurses often feel uneasy when determining the acuity level for pediatric patients, particularly infants. Gathering a precise history from the caregiver and assessing the child’s activity are crucial steps. A child who cannot be comforted or who appears withdrawn may be at significant risk for severe illness. The situations below illustrate examples of high-risk conditions in children:

Convulsions.

Severe dehydration and sepsis.

Ketoacidosis caused by diabetes.

Burns resulting from child abuse.

Injury to the head.

Overdoses or ingestion of vitamins, iron, or other substances.

An infant younger than 28 days old who has a temperature of 100.4° F (38° C) or higher.

###### Transplant

Patients who have undergone organ transplantation are typically unwell and classified as high risk. They may develop organ rejection, sepsis, or other complications. Individuals awaiting transplantation are also generally regarded as high risk.

###### Respiratory

Numerous respiratory issues can put patients at significant risk. Those experiencing mild to moderate distress should undergo further assessment of their respiratory rate and pulse oximetry to decide if they should be classified as ESI level 2. Patients exhibiting severe respiratory distress who need immediate life-saving measures, such as intubation, qualify for level 1. A high-risk patient is someone who is currently breathing and oxygenating sufficiently but is in respiratory distress and could quickly worsen. Causes of respiratory distress may include asthma, pulmonary embolism, pleural effusion, pneumothorax, inhalation of a foreign object, exposure to toxic smoke, or shortness of breath accompanied by chest pain.

###### Toxicological

The majority of patients presenting with an overdose require prompt assessment, as these cases are considered high risk. Identifying the specific substances ingested and their amounts is frequently challenging. If the overdose was intentional and the patient expresses suicidal thoughts, this also qualifies as a high-risk scenario. Patients who arrive without breathing or need urgent lifesaving measures should be assigned ESI level 1, while all other admitted overdose cases should be classified as ESI level 2.

###### Trauma

Patients who have experienced a traumatic event are often at significant risk for injury, even if no visible injuries are present. Any injury mechanism that carries a high risk should be classified as ESI level 2, unless the patient has unstable vital signs and needs immediate intervention, in which case they should be assigned ESI level 1. Serious injuries occur due to the transfer of mechanical or kinetic energy, typically from acceleration, deceleration, or both. Examples include motor vehicle and motorcycle accidents, falls, and gunshot or stab wounds, all of which involve blunt or penetrating trauma and require thorough assessment for possible severe injury. The triage nurse should gather information such as the patient’s age, any pre-existing medical conditions, environmental factors, the height of a fall or jump, the speed of the vehicle involved, any history of loss of consciousness, the site of a penetrating injury, and the type of weapon used. The nurse will use their understanding of biomechanics and injury mechanisms to evaluate the patient and determine if they meet ESI level 2 criteria. Gunshot wounds to the head, neck, chest, or groin generally necessitate trauma team involvement and immediate care, and should be triaged as ESI level 1.

###### Wound Management

What factors classify a wound as high risk? Is there ongoing, uncontrolled bleeding? Is there evidence of arterial bleeding? Does the injury involve a partial amputation? Consider how the wound occurred and whether the mechanism of injury puts the patient at increased risk for additional traumatic complications. The majority of wounds do not qualify for ESI level 2. For example, a patient with a stab wound to the thigh that only affects the subcutaneous tissue, has bleeding under control, and maintains good distal neurological function would be categorized as ESI level 4. However, any wound with uncontrolled bleeding that demands immediate, lifesaving intervention to stabilize the patient falls under level-1 criteria.

##### Confusion/Lethargy/ Disorientation

The second consideration when assessing if a patient qualifies for level-2 criteria is whether they are experiencing new confusion, lethargy, or disorientation. Changes in mental status are a common reason for seeking care. Patients with these symptoms are often brought to the emergency department by relatives, friends, or emergency personnel. At decision point B in the ESI algorithm, confusion, lethargy, or disorientation indicates a recent or sudden change in consciousness. Ongoing dementia or chronic confusion does not satisfy the requirements for ESI level 2. Acute confusion, lethargy, or disorientation can result from several serious medical issues, such as stroke, transient ischemic attack, other brain structural abnormalities, metabolic or electrolyte disturbances like hypoglycemia or hyponatremia, and toxicological problems.

This part of the algorithm is typically straightforward and offers minimal room for misinterpretation. When a patient arrives at triage with an unknown medical history and is confused, lethargic, or disoriented, the triage nurse should presume these symptoms are new and assign an ESI level 2 triage category. Additionally, if the patient exhibits new confusion, lethargy, or disorientation and needs an immediate life-saving intervention as outlined earlier, they qualify for ESI level 1.

##### Severe Pain/Distress

The last consideration in deciding if the patient qualifies for level-2 criteria is whether they are experiencing severe pain or distress. The patient must be evaluated for signs of significant pain or distress. Any patient reporting a pain score of 7 out of 10 or higher should be evaluated for ESI level-2 criteria.

The word "considered" holds significant importance. It is ultimately the triage nurse’s judgment to decide if the combination of the patient’s clinical condition and reported pain level justifies assigning an ESI level 2. For instance, a patient whose toe was struck by a heavy metal object might report their pain as 10 out of 10. The patient could indeed have a fracture and be in intense pain, and may not have attempted any pain relief before arriving at the emergency department. In this scenario, the appropriate triage level would be ESI level 4, as only one resource—an x-ray—will be required. The triage nurse should provide comfort measures at triage, such as applying ice, elevating the foot, and administering pain medication if protocols allow, to help alleviate the pain. The nurse should accept the patient’s report of 10/10 pain and address it during triage. Nevertheless, this patient can safely wait to be seen, and it would not be appropriate to allocate the last available bed to them. In conclusion, the triage nurse evaluates not just the patient’s reported pain score, but also considers the main complaint, medical history, and the patient’s physical presentation when assigning a triage level. Patients for whom severe pain could justify an ESI level 2 rating include:

A patient experiencing severe (10/10) flank pain and visibly writhing during triage.

An 80-year-old woman experiencing generalized abdominal pain rated 7 out of 10, accompanied by intense nausea.

A 30-year-old individual experiencing an acute pain crisis due to sickle cell disease.

A cancer patient experiencing intense pain.

Any burn, whether full-thickness or partial-thickness, that necessitates prompt pain management.

All emergency department patients should be evaluated for pain and asked to rate their pain using a tool like the visual analog scale. Many triage nurses feel uneasy about recording a patient’s pain score and then having the patient wait to be seen. It is crucial for triage nurses to recognize that a patient’s self-reported pain score is just one aspect of the overall pain assessment. For instance, triage nurses often encounter patients who appear comfortable—such as laughing, talking on the phone, or eating—yet claim their pain is 10 or higher. Triage nurses should assign an ESI level 2 if a patient reports a pain score of 7 out of 10 or more and the nurse’s subjective and objective evaluation indicates that the pain requires interventions beyond what can be provided at triage. In such cases, the triage nurse determines that it would not be appropriate for the patient to wait and assigns them to the last available bed.

Ultimately, when deciding if a patient qualifies for ESI level-2, the triage nurse needs to evaluate for severe distress, which can be either physiological or psychological. Beyond pain, patients with significant respiratory distress fulfill the physiological criteria for ESI level 2. Severe psychological distress may be seen in patients who are:

Overwhelmed with distress following a sexual assault.

Displaying disruptive behavior during triage.

Aggressive.

Individuals who have experienced domestic abuse.

Undergoing an intense response to grief.

These patients are typically prioritized by the triage nurse to be taken directly to the treatment area, allowing them to bypass the waiting room.

##### Summary

We have examined the essential elements and questions required to assess if a patient qualifies for ESI level-2. It is vital for the triage nurse to take these questions into account when evaluating every patient. Overlooking a high-risk scenario could lead to longer wait times and possibly adverse outcomes for the patient.

### Chapter 5. Expected Resource Needs

Historically, triage systems have relied exclusively on assessing the severity of a patient’s condition. In these systems, nurses determine an acuity level by judging how long a patient can safely wait before being evaluated by a healthcare provider. The Emergency Severity Index (ESI) introduces a different method by not only prioritizing who should be seen first, but also, for patients with lower acuity, estimating the resources that will likely be required to reach a clinical decision. This chapter provides background on the rationale for incorporating resource prediction into the ESI and explains what is considered a resource. It also presents examples of patients classified as ESI levels 3 to 5, along with the anticipated resources each will need.

Traditionally, comprehensive triage has served as the primary approach for assigning triage acuity in U.S. emergency departments (Emergency Nurses Association [ENA], 1997, pp. 3-10; Gilboy, Travers & Wuerz, 1999). These triage systems rely on the nurse’s evaluation of vital signs, both subjective and objective data, medical history, allergies, and current medications to determine the level of triage acuity.

Predicting resource needs is a key component of the Emergency Severity Index (ESI) for patients classified as ESI levels 3, 4, or 5. It is essential to note that resource allocation is not considered for patients with high acuity, such as those at ESI levels 1 or 2. Resource prediction sets the ESI apart from other triage systems that focus solely on patient acuity. When Drs. Wuerz and Eitel developed the ESI, they incorporated resource utilization to enhance the data available and improve the accuracy of triage decisions. They believed that experienced emergency department (ED) triage nurses could anticipate the types and quantities of tests, treatments, and consultations a patient would require during their ED visit. This has been supported by recent studies on ESI implementation and validation, which have demonstrated that triage nurses can accurately predict the resource needs of ED patients (Eitel, Travers, Rosenau, Gilboy & Wuerz, 2003; Tanabe, Gimbel, Yarnold & Adams, 2004). One such study, conducted across seven EDs in diverse geographic locations, including both urban and rural settings as well as academic and community hospitals, found that nurses using the ESI correctly estimated the number of resources needed by ED patients 70% of the time. In other words, experienced triage nurses using the ESI can reliably predict at triage how many resources a patient will need to reach a disposition in the ED, and, more importantly, can distinguish between patients who will require low versus high resource use. This ability to differentiate based on resource needs enables more efficient patient flow at ED intake by directing patients into different operational pathways, allowing for parallel processing. Additionally, research has shown that ESI triage levels are associated with significant patient outcomes, such as admission and mortality rates (Eitel et al., 2003).

It is important to remember that resource prediction applies only to patients who are less acutely ill. At decision points A and B in the ESI algorithm (Figure 5-1), the nurse determines if patients qualify for ESI levels 1 or 2 solely based on how severe their condition is. At decision point C, however, the nurse assigns ESI levels 3 through 5 by evaluating both the patient’s acuity and the resources they are likely to require. Therefore, the triage nurse takes resource needs into account only if the responses to decision points A and B are “no.”

To determine what resources an ED patient may require, the triage nurse should have a broad understanding of emergency department care standards and, more specifically, know what is considered reasonable and typical emergency care. One simple way to approach this is to consider, “Based on this patient’s main complaint, which resources are emergency providers most likely to use?”

The triage nurse relies on information gathered from a brief subjective and objective assessment, along with the patient’s medical history, current medications, age, and gender, to estimate how many resources the emergency department provider will require to make a decision about the patient’s care. For instance, a healthy teenager with a straightforward leg cut and no significant medical background would likely need just one resource: suturing. Conversely, an elderly patient with several chronic conditions and no prior episodes of dizziness who arrives with a head laceration from a fall will obviously require multiple resources, such as suturing, laboratory tests, an ECG, imaging studies, or specialist consultations. Proper application of the ESI triage system depends on the nurse’s ability to anticipate resource needs, making it most effective when performed by a seasoned emergency nurse. Overall, regardless of the triage method used, we maintain that triage should be conducted by an experienced emergency nurse to ensure patient safety.

Table 5-1 (also referenced as Table 3-1) outlines the guidelines for classifying resources within the ESI triage system. The distinction between ESI levels 3, 4, and 5 is based on the nurse’s assessment of the number of resources a patient will require for disposition. According to the triage nurse’s judgment, patients anticipated to need no resources are assigned to level 5, those expected to need one resource are placed in level 4, and patients likely to require two or more resources are categorized as ESI level 3. Research has shown that patients needing two or more resources experience higher rates of hospital admission, increased mortality, and longer emergency department stays (Eitel et al., 2003; Tanabe et al., 2004 Reliability and validity).

While Table 5-1 does not include every possible resource, it offers general direction regarding the types of diagnostic tests, procedures, and treatments that are considered resources within the ESI system. Emergency nurses using the ESI should avoid focusing too much on the specific definitions of each resource. The key point is that ESI only requires the triage nurse to estimate the resources a patient will likely need during their ED visit. Table 5-1 lists the most frequently used resources, but it is neither feasible nor necessary to list every potential ED resource. For accurate ESI assignment, it is sufficient to determine whether a patient will require no resources, one resource, or two or more resources. Once a triage nurse identifies two likely resources, further estimation is unnecessary. The main purpose of the ESI resource component is to distinguish patients with more complex, resource-intensive needs from those with simpler issues. For ESI triage, resources are defined as interventions that go beyond a basic exam or minor interventions by ED staff, or that involve personnel outside the ED. Resources that demand significant ED staff time (such as administering IV medications or inserting a chest tube) or require assistance from outside departments (like radiology for x-rays or surgical consultations) tend to increase the patient’s length of stay in the ED and reflect a higher level of patient complexity and triage category.

There are frequently asked questions regarding what qualifies as an ESI resource. One common question concerns how many blood or urine tests and x-rays count as a resource. According to the ESI triage system, the triage nurse should consider the number of distinct types of resources required to decide the patient’s disposition, rather than counting each individual test.

A complete blood count (CBC) and an electrolyte panel together make up a single laboratory test resource.

A complete blood count and a chest x-ray are two types of resources (laboratory test and imaging).

A CBC and a urinalysis are both laboratory tests, and when performed together, they are considered a single resource.

A chest x-ray and standard skull radiographs are one type of resource (x-ray).

Cervical spine X-rays and a head CT scan are two imaging resources (X-ray and CT scan).

Another commonly debated resource is the use of a splint, which is not considered a resource. If it were, patients with ankle sprains would be classified as ESI level 3 (requiring an x-ray and splint). Although applying a splint can require significant effort, it’s crucial to remember that resource prediction is solely intended to categorize patients and ensure they are directed to the appropriate area within the ED. In many emergency departments, ESI level-3 patients are not suitable for fast track or urgent care sections. Triage scores do not reflect the overall intensity of nursing workload.

Another frequently asked question about ESI resources concerns the inclusion of eye irrigation as a resource. Patients who experience a chemical splash to the eye are typically classified as ESI level-2 due to the high-risk nature of their injury, so the need for eye irrigation does not influence their ESI level. On the other hand, if the eye issue is caused by dust particles, the patient is not automatically considered high risk. In such cases, eye irrigation is counted as a resource, placing the patient at ESI level-4. Performing an eye exam is not considered a resource since it is part of the standard physical examination. Additional questions about resources are discussed in the Frequently Asked Questions section of Chapter 5 in Appendix A.

Clinicians often ask about the items categorized as “not resources” in Table 5-1. This list is designed to help triage nurses efficiently and accurately assign patients to one of five clinically distinct levels (Wuerz, Milne, Eitel, Travers & Gilboy, 2000). Items considered not to be resources include physical examinations, point-of-care testing, and procedures that generally do not increase a patient’s length of stay in the emergency department or suggest greater complexity. Because it is standard practice for all ED patients to receive a basic history and physical exam, these assessments—including pelvic exams—are not counted as resources for ESI classification. The strength of the ESI lies in its straightforwardness; the main aim of identifying resources is to distinguish patients with more complex needs who require two or more resources (level 3 or higher) from those with less complicated issues who will likely need fewer than two resources (level 4 or 5). Emergency nurses should avoid overcomplicating the ESI by focusing too much on the specifics of resource definitions. In most cases, a patient will need either no resources, one resource, or two or more resources.

Although resource use can differ depending on the location, provider, or even the individual patient, triage nurses are encouraged to base their ESI resource predictions on the typical management of the most frequent presenting issues. Ideally, patients with similar complaints should require roughly the same resources at any emergency department. For instance, if an 82-year-old nursing home resident with an indwelling urinary catheter presents with fever and cough, the provider will likely order blood tests, urine tests, and a chest x-ray. The triage nurse can reasonably anticipate that this patient will need two or more resources and should therefore assign an ESI level 3.

While there may be slight differences in procedures among various emergency departments, these usually do not significantly impact the triage rating. For instance, some departments perform pregnancy tests within the ED (which ESI does not count as a resource), while others send the tests to the lab (which ESI does count as a resource). However, it is uncommon for patients to require only a pregnancy test, as most will need at least one additional resource. One operational difference that could lead to varying ESI levels is how patients with a sole complaint of sore throat are managed. In some hospitals, throat cultures are routinely taken (counted as one resource, ESI level 4), whereas in others, they are not (no resources, ESI level 5). Another example is the application of the Ottawa Ankle Rules, which are evidence-based guidelines for deciding if an ankle x-ray is necessary for injury. The use of these rules differs between institutions; those that implement them at triage may order fewer x-rays compared to those that do not use the rules regularly.

Temperature is a key factor in evaluating the allocation of resources for infants and young children. This topic will be discussed in Chapter 6.

Clinically, patients classified as ESI level 4 and 5 can wait several hours before being seen by a provider. However, from a customer service perspective, these patients may be more appropriately managed in a fast-track or urgent care environment. Mid-level practitioners with the right skill set and supervision are capable of treating level-4 and 5 patients. The ESI system also offers an operational benefit, as level-5 patients can occasionally be accommodated for a brief evaluation and disposition by a provider, even when the department is full. Frequently, triage policies specify that ESI level-4 or 5 patients may be directed to an urgent care or fast-track area.

In conclusion, the ESI introduces a novel method for emergency department triage by incorporating predictions regarding the number of resources required to determine patient disposition. For patients classified as ESI levels 3, 4, and 5, resource needs are factored into the triage level, whereas decisions for ESI levels 1 and 2 rely solely on the severity of the patient’s condition. Table 5-2 provides examples of patients in ESI levels 3, 4, and 5. In practice, estimating resource needs has proven highly useful for managing the large volume of patients presenting with non-acute issues.

### Chapter 6.The Role of Vital Signs in ESI Triage

##### Introduction Figure 6-1. Danger Zone Vital Signs

This chapter centers on decision point D, which involves evaluating the patient's vital signs. By this stage in the ESI algorithm, the triage nurse has already established that the patient does not qualify for ESI level 1 or 2 and will need two or more resources. Because the patient requires at least two resources, they are classified as at least ESI level 3. At this juncture, the nurse reviews the patient’s vital signs, including heart rate, respiratory rate, and oxygen saturation, and, for children under three, temperature. If any of the vital signs exceed the danger zone thresholds (as shown in decision point D, Figure 6-1), the nurse should seriously consider upgrading the patient from level 3 to level 2.

In the ESI triage training program, significant time should be allocated to discussing how vital signs impact the decision to reclassify a patient from ESI level 3 to level 2. It is important to emphasize that the experienced triage nurse is ultimately responsible for determining if a patient qualifies for ESI level 2, taking into account the patient’s medical history, current medications, and both subjective and objective assessments, including overall appearance. This determination relies on the nurse’s clinical expertise and understanding of normal vital sign ranges for all age groups, as well as the effects of factors like medications, medical history, and pain levels.

##### What Are Vital Signs?

Vital signs are typically basic measurements of physiological functions such as temperature, blood pressure, pulse, respiratory rate, and pulse oximetry (refer to Table 6-1). These measurements often guide healthcare professionals in choosing a specific course of action. In recent years, nursing literature has increasingly highlighted the significance of pain, with the American Pain Society coining the term “Pain: the fifth vital sign” to raise awareness among healthcare providers about the need to assess and manage pain. Pain evaluation is a key part of the ESI and is actually considered earlier in its process. For ESI purposes, the vital sign parameters used at decision point D for children under three years old include heart rate, respiratory rate, oxygen saturation, and temperature. Vital signs provide objective information that helps determine a patient’s general health status and viability. The readings we collect shape our understanding of a patient’s overall condition and influence our diagnostic and treatment decisions. Nevertheless, vital signs alone do not offer a complete assessment of a patient’s state. They can be influenced by various factors, such as prescription drugs, herbal supplements, and recreational substances. For instance, beta-blockers can cause a slower heart rate and mask the typical rapid heart rate seen in shock. Hypothyroidism, especially in older adults, may result in low body temperature even during severe infections like sepsis. Similarly, a young adult’s high temperature could be due to recreational drug use.

Vital signs are fluctuating, dynamic markers that supplement a patient’s assessment. Their measurement can depend on the person taking them, and what is considered a normal range may differ based on the source referenced. Even in optimal circumstances, vital signs are not always dependable or precise (Edmonds, Mower, Lovato & Lomeli, 2002). Often, the patient’s overall appearance and clinical context are most informative. Nevertheless, if a triage nurse believes that obtaining vital signs would assist in evaluating risk, they should be recorded. For instance, if a patient is on immunosuppressive drugs, undergoing chemotherapy, or has an illness like AIDS that suppresses the immune system, body temperature should be checked.

##### Are Vital Signs Necessary at Triage?

Before the introduction of five-level triage in the United States, it was customary for every patient arriving at an emergency department to have their vital signs measured prior to being assigned a triage level. Vital signs were viewed as a crucial part of the initial nursing evaluation and frequently served as a basis for decision-making. In the traditional three-level triage system, vital signs played a key role in determining how long a patient could safely wait for care; if vital signs were normal, patients were often allowed to wait longer. As a result, vital signs historically carried significant weight in triage assessments, sometimes more so than the patient’s clinical presentation.

Recently, updated triage models recommend that vital signs be used selectively during triage (Gilboy, Travers & Wuerz, 2000). In many five-level triage systems, taking initial vital signs is not required and is generally not done for level-1 or level-2 patients, who are the most critically ill. For instance, the Guidelines for Implementation of the Australasian Triage Scale in Emergency Departments specify that vital signs should only be taken at triage if they are needed to assess urgency or if there is enough time (Australasian College for Emergency Medicine, 2000). Likewise, the Canadian Triage and Acuity Scale (CTAS) states that vital signs should be measured only when necessary to determine the triage category, particularly for levels 3, 4, and 5, and only if time allows (Beveridge et al., 2002). The Manchester Triage Group incorporates specific vital sign criteria as part of its decision-making flow chart, using these parameters to help the triage nurse determine the patient’s acuity level.

Vital signs are not always the best method for determining triage acuity. Some research indicates that taking vital signs may not be essential during the initial triage assessment. In 2002, Cooper, Flaherty, Lin, and Hubbell studied how vital signs influence triage status, also taking into account factors like age and the ability to communicate. Their study involved over 14,000 patients across 24 emergency departments in the United States. The findings showed that vital signs altered the triage acuity level in only 8% of cases. When looking more closely at specific age groups, children aged 2 years or younger experienced the greatest change in triage decisions, with an 11.4% difference after vital signs were obtained.

##### Vital Signs and ESI Triage

With ESI triage, the only mandatory situation for checking vital signs is for patients who do not initially qualify as ESI level 1 or 2, but are expected to require two or more resources. For patients assigned to ESI levels 1, 2, 4, or 5, taking vital signs at triage is optional and left to the triage nurse’s judgment. Although the ESI system does not mandate vital sign assessment for every patient at triage, individual institutions may have their own protocols. Hospital policies on vital sign assessment at triage are shaped by factors like staffing, patient mix, and available resources, which are not addressed in this handbook. Generally, it is always acceptable to take vital signs when triaging a stable patient. According to ESI, vital signs are only required for level-3 patients. (Refer to Table 6-2)

The creators of the ESI and the current research team agree that experienced emergency department nurses can use vital sign information to supplement their clinical judgment when assigning ESI ratings to patients. However, there is limited evidence linking abnormal vital signs to emergency department acuity or confirming that these abnormalities reliably indicate serious illness. The ESI has been updated over time to incorporate new evidence and recommendations from the literature. Initially, the ESI working group relied on systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS) research (Rangel-Frausto et al., 1995) to develop the danger zone vital sign criteria and related footnotes. The first ESI version used SIRS criteria, including a heart rate over 90 in adults, as a definitive reason to upgrade a patient from ESI level 3 to level 2 (Wuerz, Milne, Eitel, Traers & Gilboy, 2000). The SIRS studies focused on mortality predictors in intensive care unit patients. Due to a high number of false positives when applying these criteria to emergency department patients in the initial ESI hospitals, the heart rate threshold was increased to 100 in ESI version 2, and nurses were advised to consider upgrading adult patients with heart rates above 100 to ESI level 2 (Wuerz et al., 2001; Gilboy, Tanabe, Travers, Eitel & Wuerz, 2003). Pediatric vital sign parameters were also incorporated into the danger zone vital signs criteria.

When applying ESI as a triage method, it is not required to assess vital signs in the triage area for patients who are promptly assigned to level 1 or 2. If a patient appears unstable or has a primary complaint that demands immediate intervention, they should be quickly moved to the treatment area. In such cases, the resuscitation team will take and monitor vital signs at the bedside. This includes patients whose clinical presentation suggests a high risk or an urgent need for cardiovascular or respiratory support, such as those who look pale, sweaty, or cyanotic. Nevertheless, the triage nurse may choose to check vital signs in the triage area if there is no available bed or if they believe that vital sign data could help determine the correct triage level. Some patients may only be recognized as ESI level 1 after their vital signs are measured. For instance, an elderly patient who is awake and alert but complains of dizziness may be found to have a critical condition if their heart rate is discovered to be 32 or 180 during the assessment.

According to the ESI algorithm described in Chapter 3, if a patient does not qualify for ESI level 1 or 2, the triage nurse proceeds to decision point C. At this stage, the nurse evaluates how many resources the patient is likely to require in the emergency department. If only one or no resources are anticipated, the patient can be categorized as ESI level 4 or 5, and a vital sign check is not needed. However, if two or more resources are expected to be necessary, the nurse moves to decision point D, where vital signs should be measured. Vital signs are particularly significant for some patients during triage, especially those assigned to ESI level 3, as they can provide additional evidence of serious illness. If any vital signs fall within the danger zone, it is advised that the triage nurse consider upgrading the patient’s triage level from 3 to 2.

The ESI triage system specifically incorporates heart rate, respiratory rate, and oxygen saturation (for patients who may have respiratory issues) as vital signs. Temperature is only factored into ESI triage for children younger than three years old. Notably, blood pressure is not part of the ESI algorithm when evaluating abnormal vital signs. However, this does not imply that triage nurses should avoid measuring blood pressure or temperature in older children or adults; rather, these measurements are not typically used to determine the correct triage acuity level.

##### Vital Signs and Pediatric Fever

In this edition of the ESI Handbook, version 4 (v.4) of the ESI algorithm has been revised to reflect updated pediatric fever guidelines. As illustrated in Figure 6-2, note D of the ESI algorithm covers pediatric fever criteria relevant to ESI triage. This part includes guidance from the American College of Emergency Physicians’ Clinical Policy for Children Under Three Years Old Presenting to the Emergency Department With Fever (ACEP, 2003).

The ESI Triage Research Team advises that vital signs should be checked in patients younger than 3 years old during triage. Specifically, taking a temperature is crucial for all children from birth up to 36 months, and assessing vital signs is a key part of evaluating any infant under 36 months with a known fever (Baraff, 2000). This process helps distinguish between ESI level-2 and level-3 patients and reduces the chance that children who may have bacteremia are directed to express care or face an inappropriate delay. Keep in mind that any patient who is in immediate danger or at high risk will be categorized as ESI level 1 or 2.

Table 6-3 offers guidance for triage nurses on using the ESI to evaluate febrile children and select the most suitable triage level. Fever is commonly defined as a rectal temperature above 38.0° C (100.4° F) (Baraff et al., 1993; ACEP, 2003). Infants younger than 28 days with a fever should be regarded as high risk and given at least an ESI level 2. For infants aged 28 days to 3 months, there are no definitive guidelines. The ESI research team advises triage nurses to follow their hospital’s protocols. It is recommended that nurses consider assigning at least an ESI level 2 to these patients.

In version 4 of the ESI, we have adopted a different set of guidelines for managing fever in children aged 3 to 36 months. These guidelines focus on children with high fevers, defined as a temperature above 39.0° C (102.2° F) (ACEP, 2003). When evaluating a highly febrile child in this age group, the triage nurse should determine the child’s immunization status and whether there is a clear source for the fever. If the child is not fully immunized or if no source for the fever can be identified, the child should be categorized as at least ESI level 3. If the child’s immunizations are current and there is an identifiable cause for the fever, an ESI level of 4 or 5 is suitable. For instance, a 7-month-old who is under the care of a pediatrician, has received the Haemophilus influenza type b (HIB) vaccine, and presents with a fever while tugging at his ear could be assigned to ESI level 5.

##### Case Examples

The case studies below illustrate how vital signs information is utilized during ESI triage.

A healthy-appearing 28-year-old woman states, “My doctor said I’m approximately 6 weeks pregnant, and I believe I might be having a miscarriage.” She reports, “I began spotting this morning and am now experiencing cramping.” She has no allergies or past medical history and is taking prenatal vitamins. Her vital signs are: temperature 98°F, heart rate 112, respiratory rate 22, and blood pressure 90/60.

This patient qualifies for an upgrade from level 3 to level 2 triage due to her vital signs. Her elevated heart rate and respiratory rate, along with low blood pressure, are worrisome. These symptoms may suggest internal hemorrhage caused by a ruptured ectopic pregnancy.

The mother of a 15-month-old reports that her baby has been experiencing diarrhea since the previous day. She mentions that everyone in the family has recently had the gastrointestinal virus that is circulating. The baby has shown reduced appetite, a mild fever, and several episodes of watery stools. The child is calmly sitting on the mother’s lap. The triage nurse observes indications of dehydration. There is no past medical history, no known drug allergies, and the baby is not on any medications. Vital signs are: temperature 100.4°F, heart rate 142, respiratory rate 48, and blood pressure 76/50.

This patient qualifies for at least ESI level 3. He will need laboratory tests and intravenous fluids as resources. Given his vital signs, the triage nurse may escalate him to ESI level 2. In an infant of this age, both heart rate and respiratory rate exceed the normal limits.

A 57-year-old woman states, “I need to see a doctor about my cough. I can’t seem to get rid of it. I barely slept last night because I was coughing so much, and now I’m extremely tired.” She mentions having a fever of 101° last night and is producing yellow sputum when she coughs. Her medical history includes a hysterectomy three years ago; she is not on any medications but is allergic to penicillin. Her vital signs are: temperature 101.4°, respiratory rate 28, heart rate 100, and oxygen saturation 90 percent.

At the start of her triage evaluation, this patient appears to possibly have pneumonia. She is likely to require two or more resources, but her low oxygen levels and rapid breathing are worrisome. Based on her vital signs, the triage nurse should upgrade her to an ESI level 2.

A 34-year-old obese woman arrives at triage with complaints of generalized abdominal pain rated 6 out of 10, ongoing for the past two days. She reports multiple episodes of vomiting and notes that her last bowel movement was three days ago. Her medical history includes back surgery; she is not on any medications and has a peanut allergy. Her vital signs are: temperature 97.8°F, heart rate 104, respiratory rate 16, blood pressure 132/80, and oxygen saturation 99%.

This patient will require at least two resources, such as laboratory tests, intravenous fluids, possibly IV medication for nausea, and a CT scan. The triage nurse should assess the patient’s vital signs, paying attention to the heart rate. Although the heart rate is slightly outside the normal range for the patient’s age, this may be attributed to pain or physical activity. Therefore, the appropriate action is to categorize the patient as ESI level 3.

A crying 9-year-old arrives at triage with her mother after slipping on an icy sidewalk and hurting her right forearm. The forearm appears clearly deformed, but circulation, sensation, and movement are intact. According to her mother, the child has no allergies, is not on any medications, and is otherwise healthy. Her vital signs are: blood pressure 100/68, heart rate 124, respiratory rate 32, and oxygen saturation 99 percent.

The child is in pain from her fall and is clearly distressed. She will need at least two resources: an x-ray and an orthopedic consultation, and possibly conscious sedation. Although her heart rate and breathing are increased, the triage nurse can confidently assign her to ESI level 3. The changes in her vital signs are most likely caused by pain and emotional upset.

A 72-year-old woman arrives at the emergency department using nasal cannula oxygen for her advanced COPD. She tells the triage nurse that she has an infected cat bite on her left hand, which appears red, swollen, and tender. She has no other health issues, uses albuterol as needed, and takes a daily aspirin. She has no known drug allergies. Her vital signs are: temperature 99.6°F, heart rate 88, respiratory rate 22, blood pressure 138/80, and oxygen saturation 91%. She reports no difficulty breathing.

This patient needs at least two resources: laboratory tests and intravenous antibiotics. She qualifies for ESI level 3. Although the triage nurse observes that her oxygen saturation and respiratory rate are abnormal for a typical adult, the patient has advanced COPD. Therefore, these vital signs are not worrisome in her case, and she will remain at ESI level 3 without being up-triaged.

##### Case Examples

The case studies below illustrate how vital signs information is utilized during ESI triage.

A healthy-appearing 28-year-old woman states, “My doctor said I’m approximately 6 weeks pregnant, and I believe I might be having a miscarriage.” She reports, “I began spotting this morning and am now experiencing cramping.” She has no allergies or past medical history and is taking prenatal vitamins. Her vital signs are: temperature 98°F, heart rate 112, respiratory rate 22, and blood pressure 90/60.

This patient qualifies for an upgrade from level 3 to level 2 triage due to her vital signs. Her elevated heart rate and respiratory rate, along with low blood pressure, are worrisome. These symptoms may suggest internal hemorrhage caused by a ruptured ectopic pregnancy.

The mother of a 15-month-old reports that her baby has been experiencing diarrhea since the previous day. She mentions that everyone in the family has recently had the gastrointestinal illness that is circulating. The baby has shown reduced appetite, a mild fever, and several episodes of watery stools. The child is calmly sitting on the mother’s lap. The triage nurse observes indications of dehydration. There is no past medical history, no known drug allergies, and the baby is not on any medications. Vital signs are: temperature 100.4°F, heart rate 142, respiratory rate 48, and blood pressure 76/50.

This patient qualifies for at least ESI level 3. He will need laboratory tests and intravenous fluids as resources. Given his vital signs, the triage nurse may upgrade him to ESI level 2. For an infant of this age, both heart rate and respiratory rate fall outside the normal range.

A 57-year-old woman states, “I need to see a doctor about my cough. I just can’t get rid of it. I barely slept last night because I was coughing so much, and now I’m extremely tired.” She mentions having a fever of 101° last night and is producing yellow sputum when she coughs. Her medical history includes a hysterectomy three years ago; she is not on any medications but is allergic to penicillin. Her vital signs are: temperature 101.4°, respiratory rate 28, heart rate 100, and oxygen saturation 90 percent.

At the start of her triage evaluation, this patient appears to possibly have pneumonia. She is likely to require two or more resources, but her low oxygen levels and rapid breathing are worrisome. Based on her vital signs, the triage nurse should upgrade her to an ESI level 2.

A 34-year-old obese woman arrives at triage with complaints of generalized abdominal pain rated 6 out of 10, ongoing for the past two days. She reports multiple episodes of vomiting and notes that her last bowel movement was three days ago. Her medical history includes back surgery; she is not on any medications and has a peanut allergy. Her vital signs are: temperature 97.8°F, heart rate 104, respiratory rate 16, blood pressure 132/80, and oxygen saturation 99%.

This patient will require at least two resources, such as laboratory tests, intravenous fluids, possibly IV medication for nausea, and a CT scan. The triage nurse should assess the patient’s vital signs, paying attention to the heart rate. Although the heart rate is slightly outside the normal range for the patient’s age, this may be attributed to pain or physical activity. Therefore, the appropriate action is to categorize the patient as ESI level 3.

A crying 9-year-old arrives at triage with her mother after slipping on an icy sidewalk and hurting her right forearm. The forearm appears clearly deformed, but circulation, sensation, and movement are intact. According to her mother, the child has no allergies, is not on any medications, and is otherwise healthy. Her vital signs are: blood pressure 100/68, heart rate 124, respiratory rate 32, and oxygen saturation 99 percent.

The child is in pain from her fall and is clearly distressed. She will need at least two resources: an x-ray and an orthopedic consultation, and possibly conscious sedation. Although her heart rate and breathing are increased, the triage nurse can confidently assign her to ESI level 3. The changes in her vital signs are most likely caused by pain and emotional upset.

A 72-year-old woman arrives at the emergency department using nasal cannula oxygen for her advanced COPD. She tells the triage nurse that she has an infected cat bite on her left hand, which appears red, swollen, and tender. She has no other health issues, uses albuterol as needed, and takes a daily aspirin. She has no known drug allergies. Her vital signs are: temperature 99.6°F, heart rate 88, respiratory rate 22, blood pressure 138/80, and oxygen saturation 91%. She reports no difficulty breathing.

This patient needs at least two resources, including laboratory tests and intravenous antibiotics, qualifying her for ESI level 3. Although the triage nurse observes that her oxygen saturation and respiratory rate fall outside the normal adult range, the patient has advanced COPD. Therefore, these vital signs are not worrisome in her case, and she will remain at ESI level 3 without being up-triaged.

##### Conclusion

This chapter lays the groundwork for comprehending how vital signs are used within the Emergency Severity Index triage system. It also discusses the unique considerations for patients younger than 36 months. More research is needed to determine the most appropriate vital sign thresholds for emergency department triage. Additional studies will focus on pediatric patients arriving at the emergency department. We anticipate that future updates to the ESI will incorporate new evidence about how well triage vital signs predict outcomes for both pediatric and adult patients.

### Appendix A. Frequently Asked Questions

##### Chapter 3.

###### Frequently Asked Questions

1. Is it necessary to raise the triage level for an adult patient if their heart rate exceeds 100?

No, it is something to take into account.

2. Is it necessary to increase a patient’s triage level if their pain score is 7 out of 10 or higher?

No, this is just one aspect to take into account.

If a patient is chronically confused, does that mean they should always be assigned to ESI level 2?

No, patients experiencing a sudden change in consciousness are classified as ESI level 2.

4. At what times should vital signs be measured?

For any patient classified as ESI level-3, vital signs are always taken if the triage nurse believes they could be helpful.

##### Chapter 4.

###### Frequently Asked Questions

Am I required to assign an ESI triage level of 2 to a 25-year-old woman who reports her pain as 10 out of 10 but is eating potato chips?

No. Since her vital signs are stable and she doesn’t meet any high-risk criteria, this patient should be categorized as ESI level 3. She will probably require lab tests and at least two resources, such as x-rays, an IV, or pain medication. Therefore, you should not allocate your last available bed to her.

Should an 80-year-old woman with ongoing confusion be assigned an ESI level 2 during triage?

No. The sudden appearance of confusion, lethargy, or disorientation qualifies for ESI level 2.

3. Shouldn’t a patient experiencing ongoing chest pain be classified as ESI level 1? After all, they ought to receive the highest priority.

Not every patient presenting with chest pain qualifies for ESI level-1. Patients who are unresponsive, without a pulse, not breathing, or in need of immediate life-saving measures fall under level-1. Those with chest pain who appear pale, sweaty, have low blood pressure, or slow heart rate and need urgent IV access to stabilize their condition are also considered level-1. Patients who are stable but experiencing ongoing chest pain generally meet high-risk criteria and should be assigned ESI level-2, with prompt placement ensured.

##### Chapter 5.

###### Frequently Asked Questions

1. Why isn’t teaching someone how to walk with crutches considered a resource?

Although teaching patients how to use crutches can take up a significant amount of the emergency department staff’s time, this instruction is frequently given to individuals with uncomplicated ankle sprains. These cases are generally categorized as ESI level 4 (ankle x-ray = one resource). Such patients are clearly less acute and require fewer resources compared to more complicated cases, such as those with tibia or fibula fractures, who are typically classified as ESI level 3 (leg x-rays, orthopedic consultation, casting or splinting, IV pain management = two or more resources). Using a nursing resource intensity measure would more accurately capture the ED staff’s efforts involved in providing crutch-walking instruction.

2. Why doesn’t a splint qualify as a resource?

Using basic, pre-made splints (like those for ankle sprains) does not count as a resource. However, when ED staff create and apply splints, such as thumb spica splints for thumb fractures, this is considered a resource. To distinguish between patients with extremity injuries: those suspected of having fractures should be assigned ESI level 3 (requiring two or more resources, such as x-rays, pain medication, and the creation and application of splints or casts), while those likely to have simple sprains should be classified as ESI level 4.

3. Why is a saline or heparin lock not considered a resource?

In general, placing a heparin lock does not require much time from the emergency department staff. Nevertheless, most patients who receive heparin locks also need at least two additional resources, such as lab tests or IV medications, which typically results in them being categorized as ESI level 3 regardless.

Are all patients undergoing conscious sedation classified as ESI level 3 or above?

Conscious sedation is regarded as a complex procedure (requiring two resources) and is typically carried out on patients who are also undergoing laboratory tests, x-rays, or additional procedures like fracture reduction or dilation and curettage.

5. Are eye irrigation, administration of nebulized medications, and blood transfusions classified as resources?

All three are classified as resources in the context of ESI triage ratings. These resources are typically utilized for patients with more acute conditions, demand considerable time from emergency department staff, and are likely to result in extended patient stays.

6. Do all patients with asthma fall under ESI level 4 since they will need nebulized treatment?

No. Asthma patients who are stable and only need nebulized medication are classified as ESI level 4. Some, however, experience severe respiratory distress and qualify for ESI level 2. Others fall in between, needing intravenous steroids or an x-ray along with nebulized treatments, and are categorized as ESI level 3. Lastly, those who just need a prescription refill for their inhaler are placed in ESI level 5, as they do not need any resources.

##### Chapter 6.

###### Frequently Asked Questions

Why is it unnecessary to obtain vital signs when triaging patients classified as ESI level 1 or 2?

Vital signs are not required to classify patients as life-threatening (ESI level 1) or high-risk (ESI level 2). Because patients at ESI levels 1 and 2 are in critical condition, they need an immediate response from the medical team. Multiple actions can take place at the same time, and vital signs may be obtained during the initial evaluation in the main acute section of the emergency department.

2. Why are vital signs not mandatory for patients classified as ESI level-4 and 5?

Vital signs are not required to classify patients as low or no resource (ESI level 4 or 5). Additionally, the pain, anxiety, and discomfort experienced during an emergency department visit can often affect a patient’s vital signs, which may normalize soon after the initial evaluation. However, if there are indications of abnormal symptoms—such as altered skin color, changes in mental status, dizziness, or sweating—a nurse may decide to check vital signs. If there are no physical signs suggesting the need for vital sign assessment, the patient can proceed to the main emergency department or express care area.

3. What is the reason for taking vital signs on patients classified as ESI level-3?

Vital signs help distinguish between patients who require multiple resources and are stable (ESI level 3) and those who may be unstable or at higher risk (ESI level 2). Sometimes, patients classified as ESI level 3 may actually have unstable vital signs despite appearing stable. For ESI level-3 patients, checking vital signs acts as an important safety measure. Typically, ESI level-3 patients have more complex conditions and many end up being admitted to the hospital. Because they are not suitable for the fast-track area, these patients may have to wait longer for definitive care. They pose a particular challenge during triage, making it essential for caregivers to use vital signs to ensure the correct ESI level is assigned.

4. Why are temperatures always taken for pediatric patients under 36 months of age?

Temperature helps distinguish pediatric patients who require few or no resources (ESI level 4 or 5) from those likely to need multiple resources. In infants under three months old, an abnormal temperature can suggest bacteremia and categorize the child as high risk.

5. What causes the literature to offer differing perspectives on the importance of vital signs in the triage process?

There is no conclusive evidence regarding the usefulness of vital signs in emergency department triage. Numerous elements can impact the reliability of vital sign measurements, which are somewhat dependent on the person performing the assessment. In certain situations, factors like long-term medication use (such as beta-blockers) can influence vital signs. Additionally, vital signs can serve to meet some public health responsibilities that emergency departments have. Finally, they are also useful for categorizing young pediatric patients into different groups.

6. Does JCAHO mandate that vital signs be taken during triage?

The Joint Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations does not explicitly set a standard for vital signs. However, it does state that physiologic parameters should be evaluated based on the patient's condition.

7. Should the vital sign thresholds in the danger zone box be strictly enforced?

In everyday practice, surpassing the danger zone vital sign thresholds leads to up-triage being “considered” instead of being done automatically. The skilled triage nurse must apply sound clinical judgment when assigning the patient’s ESI level. This decision involves evaluating the patient’s vital signs, medical history, medications, and overall clinical presentation. Further research is necessary to establish how well vital signs at triage predict outcomes and to define exact thresholds for up-triage.

8. What should be done if patients classified as ESI level-4 or 5 exhibit danger zone vital signs?

Although taking vital signs is not necessary to assign ESI levels 4 or 5, many patients may still have their vitals checked during triage if that is standard procedure in a particular emergency department. According to the ESI triage guidelines, the triage nurse does not need to consider vital signs when determining if a patient qualifies for ESI level 5 (no resources) or ESI level 4 (one resource). Nonetheless, in real-world settings, a careful nurse will apply clinical judgment and may factor in vital sign data when assigning the ESI level. For example, if a patient only wants a prescription refill, has no acute symptoms, and presents with a heart rate of 104 after walking to the ED, the nurse may still assign an ESI level 5. Conversely, if the same patient has a heart rate of 148 and it is irregular, the nurse should assign an ESI level 2. The triage nurse must also address situations such as elevated blood pressure in a patient otherwise classified as ESI level 4 or 5. If the patient has no symptoms related to the high blood pressure, the triage level should remain unchanged. Typically, elevated blood pressure in an asymptomatic patient will not be managed in the ED, but it is important to refer the patient to a primary care provider for further evaluation and long-term care.

# Emergency Severity Index, Version 4: Implementation Handbook

### Note from the Director

The Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality is proud to present the Emergency Severity Index, Version 4: Implementation Handbook. This guide details every aspect of the Emergency Severity Index (ESI), a five-level triage system used in emergency departments to categorize patients into five groups—ranging from 1 (most urgent) to 5 (least urgent)—based on the severity of their condition and the resources they require.

Following the creation of the ESI by emergency physicians Richard Wuerz and David Eitel in 1998 and successful pilot testing, the ESI Triage Group was established. Additional development of the ESI was supported by a grant from AHRQ. This group, made up of clinicians, managers, educators, and researchers, continued to improve the algorithm into its current form.

Aligned with our mission to enhance the quality, safety, efficiency, and effectiveness of health care for all Americans, AHRQ places a strong focus on training. Together with the included set of two DVDs, this handbook offers essential support to emergency department nurses, physicians, and administrators in establishing a thorough ESI educational program. The resources are based on ESI Version 4, which features updates to the algorithm, particularly expanding the criteria for ESI level 1 and refining the guidelines for pediatric fever.

An effectively executed ESI program enables hospital emergency departments to quickly recognize patients requiring urgent care, more accurately identify those who can be safely and efficiently treated in a fast-track or urgent care setting instead of the main ED, and more precisely establish criteria for diverting ambulance patients away from the ED.

We hope this tool proves helpful as you continue working to enhance the quality of care in your emergency department.

### Chapter 2.Triage Acuity Systems

##### Standardization of Triage Acuity

Despite the fact that U.S. emergency departments (EDs) receive over 110 million visits annually (McCaig & Burt, 2004), there is a lack of comprehensive data on these visits at the local, regional, or national scale. This scarcity of information makes it challenging to address key questions such as “Which EDs treat the most critically ill patients?” and “What impact does patient acuity have on ED overcrowding?” As a result, there is increasing interest in developing standardized ED data systems in the United States to enhance clinical care, facilitate ED monitoring, enable benchmarking, and support research efforts (Barthell, Coonan, Finnell, Pollock, & Cochrane, 2004; Gilboy, Travers & Wuerz, 1999; Handler et al., 2004; National Center for Injury Prevention and Control).

A key data point in the emergency department is triage acuity, described by the Data Elements for Emergency Department Systems Task Force as the categorization of a patient's severity, indicating how much their condition threatens life or limb and if urgent intervention is required to relieve symptoms (NCIPC, 1997, p. 94).

There is significant inconsistency among emergency department triage acuity systems, especially in the United States (Emergency Nurses Association [ENA], 1997). Different systems use varying terminology for triage categories, and there is no universal consensus on the definitions for each level. Table 2-1 provides examples of acuity rating systems. Due to the absence of standardized triage acuity data in the U.S., it is understandable that the emergency department has been referred to as a “black box” of crucial public health information that remains mostly inaccessible in its current state (Martinez, 1995).

The Emergency Severity Index (ESI) is an innovative tool for assessing triage acuity in emergency departments. Research has demonstrated its consistency across various ED environments, including both urban and rural areas as well as academic and community hospitals (Eitel, Travers, Rosenau, Gilboy & Wuerz, 2003). With widespread adoption in U.S. emergency departments, the ESI could serve as a standard method for triage acuity assessment. This chapter outlines the traditional triage systems used in U.S. EDs and reviews the research related to those systems. It then provides a brief overview of newer triage approaches developed in Australia, Canada, and the United Kingdom. The chapter ends with an examination of studies on the ESI system and discusses its potential advantages.

##### Triage Systems in the United States

Although numerous hospitals in the United States continue to utilize three- or four-level triage systems, there is a movement toward adopting five-level systems. The National Center for Health Statistics intends to substitute four-level triage data with five-level data in upcoming national benchmarking surveys of U.S. emergency departments. This change is driven by increasing evidence that five-level triage acuity data are more reliable and valid compared to three-level systems (personal communication, Linda McCaig, National Center for Health Statistics, October 6, 2004).

Both the ENA and the American College of Emergency Physicians (ACEP) have expressed their support for five-level triage systems in U.S. emergency departments. In 2003, a joint task force from ENA and ACEP was formed to review the evidence regarding five-level triage systems, and their work is still in progress. That same year, ACEP and ENA released a joint statement:

ACEP and ENA believe that patient care quality would improve by introducing a standardized triage scale and acuity categorization process in emergency departments. Drawing on expert consensus and current evidence, ACEP and ENA endorse the use of a dependable, validated five-level triage scale (ACEP, 2003; ENA, 2003).

A 2005 task force paper recommended both the ESI and the Canadian Triage and Acuity Scale (CTAS) as reliable and valid triage methods (Fernandes et al., 2005). With increasing evidence favoring five-level triage systems, it is probable that a greater number of U.S. hospitals have adopted some version of this approach. The ENA intends to gather information on the types of triage systems used in U.S. hospitals in their forthcoming ED survey.

##### Research on Triage Systems in the United States

Research on triage acuity systems is increasing, with studies primarily examining two important aspects of triage nurses’ acuity ratings: reliability and validity (Pedhazur & Schmelkin, 1991; Waltz, Strickland & Lenz, 1991). Reliability refers to the consistency or level of agreement among users of a rating system. In the context of emergency department (ED) triage, there are two relevant types of reliability. Interrater reliability assesses whether two different nurses would assign the same triage acuity level to the same patient, while intrarater reliability evaluates if the same nurse would give the same rating to the same patient at different times. Multiple studies in the United States have found that traditional three-level triage systems often have low interrater and intrarater reliability (Gill, Reese & Diamond, 1996; Travers, Waller, Bowling, Flowers & Tintinalli, 2002; Wuerz, Fernandes & Alarcon, 1998). For example, in one study, 305 triage assessments were analyzed after all triage nurses completed a required refresher course on the hospital’s three-level triage system (Travers et al., 2002). The original ratings by the triage nurses were compared to retrospective ratings made by an expert panel of ED triage nurses, and the two groups agreed in only about half of the cases.

Validity refers to how accurately the rating system measures what it is supposed to measure. In the context of acuity ratings, validity indicates whether a label such as “nonurgent” truly reflects the absence of urgency in an emergency department patient’s condition. However, evaluating the validity of triage acuity has been challenging, and research studies have not reported on it.

In contrast to urine culture—which serves as the gold standard for accurately diagnosing urinary tract infections—there is no definitive gold standard for assessing the accuracy of triage acuity ratings in the conventional three-level triage system used in the United States. Nevertheless, surrogate indicators such as admission rates, resource use, and six-month mortality have been employed to evaluate five-level triage systems.

##### Triage Acuity Research on Five- Level Systems Abroad

Highly reliable and well-validated five-level triage systems have become the norm in other countries. Table 2-2 outlines three of these systems.

The Australasian Triage Scale (ATS), created in Australia, has been implemented across Australia and New Zealand since the early 1990s (Australasian College for Emergency Medicine, 1994, 2002; Cameron, Bradt & Ashby, 1996). The Australian Council on Healthcare Standards uses the ATS as the foundation for emergency department (ED) evaluation and quality of care, with triage classifications regularly reviewed. Australian EDs are required to manage patients according to guidelines determined by their triage level. For instance, emergency cases must be attended to within 10 minutes, while nonurgent cases should be seen within 2 hours.

Several studies have assessed the validity and reliability of the ATS. Since there is no definitive gold standard for evaluating triage acuity, researchers have compared the five-level system to other illness severity scales and patient outcomes (Cameron et al., 1996; Cleary, Ashby, Jelinek & Lagaida, 1994; Erwich, Bond, Phillips, & Baggoley, 1997). Triage categories have shown strong correlations with disease- and population-specific measures, such as the Injury Severity Scales, trauma scores, and scales for cardiac, asthma, and pediatric patients. The ATS has also demonstrated a strong relationship with resource use and outcome indicators, including admission rates, emergency department length of stay, and mortality. Additionally, studies in which triage nurses assigned acuity levels to case scenarios have found that the ATS exhibits fair to moderate interrater reliability (Dilley & Standen, 1998; Jelinek & Little, 1996).

Five-level triage systems have been adopted in both the United Kingdom (U.K.) and Canada. In the U.K., the Manchester Triage Scale is utilized.

The system, developed in the U.K., employs a flow-chart presentation style (Manchester Triage Group, 1997). Nurses begin by determining the patient's main complaint, then select one of 52 flow charts to guide a structured assessment and assign a triage category ranging from 1 (requiring immediate attention) to 5 (care needed within four hours). The Accident and Emergency Nurses Association has endorsed this system (Zimmermann, 2001). However, research on the Manchester system is limited. In one reliability study, triage decisions made by nurses were retrospectively compared to those of senior medical staff, with only fair to moderate agreement found (Goodacre, Gillett, Harris & Houlihan, 1999).

The Canadian Triage and Acuity Scale (CTAS) was created by a team of Canadian emergency physicians (Beveridge & Ducharme, 1997; Canadian Association for Emergency Physicians [CAEP], 2002). Both the National Emergency Nurses' Affiliation, Inc. (NENA) and the Canadian Association for Emergency Physicians (CAEP) have recognized CTAS as the national benchmark for emergency department triage. Canadian hospitals are mandated to report data, including CTAS scores, for all emergency department visits to the Canadian government. Research has also demonstrated that the Canadian five-level scale provides strong interrater reliability when clinicians assess the severity of written scenarios based on real patient cases.

##### History of the Emergency Severity Index (ESI)

The Emergency Severity Index (ESI) is a five-level triage system created by emergency department physicians Richard Wuerz and David Eitel in the United States (Gilboy et al., 1999; Wuerz, Milne, Eitel, Travers & Gilboy, 2000). The creators believed that a key function of an emergency department triage tool is to help prioritize patients according to the urgency of their conditions. Triage nurses assess priority by asking, “Who should be seen first?” However, Drs. Wuerz and Eitel recognized that when multiple high-priority patients arrive at the same time, the question shifts to, “How long can each patient wait?” The ESI was designed based on a new approach to ED triage. Beyond determining which patient needs immediate attention, the ESI also guides triage nurses in considering what resources are required to move the patient toward an ED outcome. While maintaining the traditional focus on patient urgency, the ESI introduces a second objective: not only sorting patients but also directing them to the appropriate resources, ensuring the right patient receives the right care at the right time and place.

The initial version (v. 1) of the ESI was first used at two university-affiliated emergency departments in the spring of 1999. By fall 2000, the ESI was updated with input from emergency department clinicians to add triage criteria for pediatric patients, and this second version (v. 2) was then introduced in five more hospitals, including both non-university teaching and community hospitals. Feedback from nurses and physicians at these locations, combined with the best available scientific evidence, led to further improvements, resulting in version 3 (v. 3) in 2001 (Wuerz et al., 2001). More recent developments have produced additional updates to the tool, which is presented in this edition of the ESI handbook as version 4 (v. 4) (Tanabe et al., in press).

Emergency physicians and nurses in the United States and Canada have carried out multiple research studies evaluating the reliability and validity of the ESI. The ESI has been directly compared with traditional three-level triage systems as well as the five-level CTAS. These studies will be discussed later in the chapter. Similar to the Australasian, Canadian, and U.K. systems, the ESI triage system consists of five levels. However, it differs in both its conceptual framework and practical use. The triage systems from Australia, Canada, and the U.K. are based on the idea that triage is meant to determine how long a patient can safely wait for care in the emergency department, with specific definitions for the time to physician assessment included in their protocols. This is a key distinction between ESI and both CTAS and ATS, as ESI does not specify expected time frames for physician evaluation.

The ESI stands out because it requires the triage nurse to predict the likely resources needed—such as diagnostic tests and procedures—in addition to assessing patient acuity, in order to assign a triage category for patients who are less critically ill. The different ESI triage levels are shown in Figure 2-1. Later chapters will explain in detail how to use the ESI to categorize emergency department patients. In summary, the process begins with evaluating acuity, focusing on the stability of the patient’s vital signs and the risk of an immediate threat to life or organs. For patients who are stable, the nurse then estimates the resources that will be necessary to reach a disposition in the emergency department, based on their professional judgment. These resource needs can vary from none to two or more.

##### Research on the Emergency Severity Index

In a preliminary study evaluating ESI v.1 ratings for 493 triage cases at two Boston hospitals in 1998, researchers determined that the system was both reliable and valid (Wuerz et al., 2000). During the study, patients were triaged at the same time by the triage nurse using the standard three-level scale and by a research nurse applying the first version of the ESI. Afterwards, an investigator, who was unaware of the research nurse’s ESI rating, assigned an ESI level based solely on the written triage note. The assigned triage levels showed a strong correlation with the resources utilized in the emergency department and with outcomes like hospital admission. Patients with higher acuity (ESI levels 1 and 2) required more resources and had a greater likelihood of being admitted compared to those with lower acuity (ESI levels 4 and 5). Agreement between the research nurse and the investigator was high, with 77 percent of cases matching exactly and 22 percent differing by only one triage level.

The reliability of the ESI has been assessed in multiple studies, utilizing the kappa statistic to determine inter-rater agreement. Kappa values range from 0, indicating no agreement, to 1, representing perfect agreement. At one of the original ESI sites, a time series approach was used to compare triage reliability with a three-level scale before and after the introduction of ESI v.1, with results showing an improvement in weighted kappa from 0.53 to 0.68 when switching to the five-level ESI (Travers et al., 2002). Another study investigated the reliability and validity of ESI v.2 during and after its adoption in triage at seven hospitals in the northeast and southeast. Over 200 triage nurses participated in an ESI training program, where they rated 40 case studies using the ESI (Eitel et al., 2003). Findings demonstrated substantial inter-rater reliability, with kappa values between 0.70 and 0.80. Additionally, 386 real patient triage decisions were analyzed, revealing high inter-rater reliability with weighted kappas from 0.69 to 0.87. In a separate study conducted in a Midwestern urban emergency department, the reliability of ESI v.3 was evaluated for 403 actual patient triages, resulting in a kappa of 0.89 (Tanabe, Gimbel, Yarnold, Kyriacou & Adams, 2004).

Researchers from Canada and the United States have directly compared the inter-rater reliability of the ESI and CTAS in a randomized study (Worster et al., 2004). The study involved ten Canadian triage nurses who were experienced with CTAS. These nurses were randomly assigned to receive either ESI version 3 or CTAS refresher training, after which they evaluated 200 case studies using either the ESI or CTAS. Both groups demonstrated excellent inter-rater reliability, with kappa values of 0.89 for ESI and 0.91 for CTAS.

The effectiveness of the ESI has been assessed by analyzing outcomes in several thousand patients. Research has demonstrated consistent and strong associations between the ESI and factors such as hospitalization, emergency department length of stay, and mortality (Eitel et al., 2003; Tanabe et al., 2004; Wuerz, 2001; Wuerz et al., 2001). Additionally, the ESI has shown moderate correlations with physician evaluation and management codes, as well as nursing workload indicators (Travers et al., 2002). The ESI also enables meaningful comparisons of patient case mix across different hospitals. In one study, a stratified random sample of 200 patients was taken from each of the seven original ESI hospitals to compare case mix (Eitel et al., 2003). As anticipated, tertiary care centers had a greater proportion of high-acuity patients, while community hospitals had more patients requiring fewer resources.

A survey conducted among nursing staff at the two initial university teaching hospitals found that reactions to the introduction of the ESI were favorable (Wuerz et al., 2001). Nurses indicated that the ESI was simpler to apply and more effective for prioritizing patients for care compared to the previous three-level systems used at those locations.

In the latest ESI study, the accuracy of ESI level 2 was closely analyzed (Tanabe et al., in press). Reviewing the outcomes of 571 ESI level-2 patients across five hospitals, researchers discovered that 20 percent of these patients required immediate, life-saving treatment. The study’s authors suggested that these individuals should be categorized as ESI level 1. The revised ESI version 4, discussed in subsequent chapters of this book, incorporates changes informed by this recent research.

##### Benefits of the Emergency Severity Index

The ESI has been adopted by hospitals across various regions, including both university and community hospitals, as well as teaching and nonteaching facilities. Clinicians, managers, and researchers in these emergency departments have recognized several advantages of ESI triage compared to traditional three-level systems. One key advantage is the ability to quickly identify patients who require immediate care. ESI triage emphasizes the rapid categorization of patients, especially when resources are limited. In some ways, ESI triage returns to the original intent of triage, as established during Napoleon’s era. It involves swiftly sorting patients into five categories, each with clinically significant differences in anticipated resource needs and corresponding operational requirements. Utilizing ESI for this rapid categorization can enhance patient flow through the emergency department. After an ESI triage level is determined, patients can be directed to further assessment, registration, initial treatment, or the waiting area, depending on their severity and expected resource needs. For instance, patients classified as level 1 or 2 can be taken straight to the treatment area for prompt evaluation and care, while those at levels 4 and 5 can proceed to registration and then wait for an available bed.

A key concern separate from ESI triage is when to perform a full nursing assessment. Many experts suggest that a comprehensive assessment does not need to take place at the initial triage station, but can instead be completed in the main treatment area or a secondary triage area, depending on each patient’s needs and the current workload in the emergency department (Gilboy et al., 1999). At triage, only the evaluation necessary to assign an ESI level is required to help with the initial sorting of patients. Full clinical assessments are time-consuming, and performing them at triage can delay care and lower satisfaction for patients with less severe conditions. As patient numbers and case complexity rise, leading to ED crowding, it is necessary to rethink traditional care processes to improve efficiency and effectiveness. Nevertheless, it remains essential to gather enough information to accurately determine the appropriate triage category. This is particularly important when patients face long waits to see a physician, which is common with higher patient volumes. Triage has become even more vital as waiting room times increase. Assigning a patient to an inappropriately low triage category can heighten the risk of poor outcomes due to prolonged waiting times.

Additional advantages of the ESI include its ability to identify patients who do not require care in the main emergency department and can instead be safely and more efficiently managed in a fast-track or urgent care setting. For instance, many hospitals have triage policies stating that all ESI level 4 and 5 patients may be directed to either medical urgent care or minor trauma sections of the ED. The policy also permits certain level-3 patients, such as those needing straightforward migraine treatment, to be sent to urgent care (UC). ESI level-3 patients assigned to UC, as well as any patients transferred from UC to the acute area for more serious issues, are tracked through the quality improvement program. Nurses using the ESI have noted that it improves communication about patient acuity compared to the previous three-level triage systems used at these facilities (Wuerz et al., 2001). For example, a triage nurse can simply say to the charge nurse, “I need a bed for a level 2 patient,” and the charge nurse immediately understands the urgency without needing a detailed explanation.

The ESI has also served as the basis for emergency department policies targeting certain groups. For instance, at one location, the psychiatric team is required to provide consultations for level 2 and 3 patients within 30 minutes, and for level 4 and 5 patients within an hour of being notified. At another facility, the ESI is part of a policy for patients over 20 weeks pregnant who come to the ED. Patients assigned ESI levels 1 and 2 receive care in the ED by emergency medicine staff with an obstetric consultation, while those at levels 3, 4, or 5 are directed to the hospital’s labor and delivery unit.

The ESI is also an effective method for establishing thresholds for redirecting ambulance patients away from the ED. At Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston, the ED Diversion Policy and Guidelines define full capacity as all RN-staffed ED beds being occupied. The ESI is utilized to assess when the department is over capacity.

Studies have demonstrated that the ESI is a dependable and accurate method for assessing triage acuity. This system has been implemented in numerous emergency departments across various regions of the United States, including both academic and community hospitals. These institutions have shown that using the ESI enhances emergency department efficiency and patient care. Broader use of the ESI in U.S. hospitals could help create a standardized approach to triage acuity assessment, supporting benchmarking, public health monitoring, and research efforts.

### Chapter 3. Introduction to the Emergency Severity Index

The Emergency Severity Index (ESI) is an easy-to-use, five-level triage tool that classifies emergency department patients by assessing both the severity of their condition and the resources they will require. The triage nurse first evaluates the patient’s acuity. If the patient does not qualify for the highest acuity levels (ESI level 1 or 2), the nurse then considers the anticipated resource needs to assign a triage level (ESI level 3, 4, or 5). Unlike other triage systems, the ESI uniquely incorporates resource requirements into its assessment. Acuity is judged based on the stability of vital signs and the risk to life, limb, or organ function. The nurse predicts resource needs by drawing on experience with patients who have had similar symptoms or injuries. Resource needs refer to the number of interventions or services a patient is likely to need before a decision about their care can be made. After becoming familiar with the ESI algorithm, the triage nurse can quickly and accurately assign patients to one of five clearly defined, non-overlapping categories. The ESI offers emergency departments a reliable and valid method for triage (Eitel, Travers, Rosenau, Gilboy & Wuerz, 2003; Travers, Waller, Bowling, Flowers & Tintinalli, 2002; Wuerz, Travers, Gilboy, Eitel, Rosenau & Yazhari, 2001; Tanabe, Gimbel, Yarnold, Kyriacou, & Adams, 2004; Tanabe, Gimbel, Yarnold, & Adams, 2004).

This chapter offers a detailed, step-by-step guide to triaging using the ESI algorithm. Later chapters delve deeper into essential concepts and include many examples to illustrate the nuances of applying ESI.

Algorithms are commonly utilized in emergency care settings. Many emergency clinicians are acquainted with the algorithms taught in programs like Basic Life Support, Advanced Cardiac Life Support, and the Trauma Nursing Core Course. These programs offer a systematic, stepwise method for clinical decision making that clinicians can master through repeated practice. At each stage, the algorithm guides the user on which questions to pose or what information to collect. Depending on the responses or data gathered, a decision is reached, and the algorithm leads the user to the subsequent step, eventually resulting in an outcome.

Using the ESI algorithm for triage requires an experienced emergency department nurse to begin at the top of the algorithm. Figure 3-1 provides a conceptual summary of the ESI algorithm, highlighting its key decision points. A more detailed explanation of the actual ESI algorithm is given later in the chapter (see Figure 3-1a). The algorithm involves four decision points (A, B, C, and D) to categorize patients into one of five triage levels (refer to Figure 3-1). With experience, the triage nurse will be able to quickly progress through each ESI decision point.

##### Decision Point A: Is the Patient Dying?

In simple terms, at decision point A (Figure 3-2), the triage nurse determines whether the patient is dying. If the response is “yes,” the triage process ends, and the patient is immediately assigned to ESI level 1. If the answer is “no,” the process continues to the next step in the algorithm, decision point B.

The question below helps assess if the patient is at risk of dying (conceptual algorithm): Does the patient need an urgent life-saving intervention? The subsequent questions assist in evaluating whether the patient fulfills level-1 criteria:

Does the patient need urgent airway management, medication, or another hemodynamic intervention?

Does the patient exhibit any of the following: is already intubated, not breathing, without a pulse, experiencing severe respiratory distress, has an SpO2 below 90 percent, shows sudden changes in mental status, or is unresponsive?

Studies have shown that triage nurses can reliably anticipate when immediate interventions are necessary (Tanabe et al., in press). For ESI triage, Table 3-1 outlines which interventions are classified as life-saving and which are not.

Interventions that are not classified as life-saving may include certain diagnostic or therapeutic procedures, but do not involve actions that would directly “save a life.” Life-saving interventions focus on ensuring an open airway, sustaining breathing, or supporting circulation. The following questions may assist in assessing whether the patient needs a life-saving intervention.

Is this patient's airway open and unobstructed?

Is the patient showing signs of breathing?

Is the patient exhibiting a pulse?

Is the nurse worried about the pulse’s rate, rhythm, and strength?

Was this patient intubated before arriving at the hospital due to worries about their capacity to keep their airway open, breathe on their own, or sustain adequate oxygen levels?

Is the nurse worried about whether this patient can supply enough oxygen to their tissues?

An ESI level-1 patient arrives at the emergency department in a critical, unstable state. Immediate intervention is essential to prevent death, prompting a rapid team response with the physician present at the bedside and nurses delivering intensive care. These patients receive immediate attention, as prompt treatment can influence their risk of complications or death.

A primary distinction between ESI level-1 and level-2 patients is the necessity for immediate physician involvement in patient care. Level-1 patients are in critical condition and need prompt evaluation and intervention by a physician. In contrast, although level-2 patients are also seriously ill, emergency nurses can begin treatment using established protocols without a physician present. The nurse identifies the need for interventions but is assured that the patient’s condition is stable enough not to worsen rapidly. The nurse can start intravenous lines, provide supplemental oxygen, perform an ECG, and connect the patient to a cardiac monitor before a physician is required at the bedside.

When assessing the necessity for urgent lifesaving measures, the triage nurse thoroughly examines the patient’s respiratory condition and oxygen saturation (SpO2) levels. Even if a patient is still breathing, severe respiratory distress or an SpO2 below 90 percent signals the need for prompt action to secure the airway and ensure adequate oxygenation. Such patients require the physician’s immediate presence to administer medications for rapid sequence intubation or to initiate other airway and breathing interventions.

Patients experiencing chest pain should also be assessed according to the same standards. While some individuals with chest pain are quite stable and may only need a diagnostic ECG, they do not fulfill level-1 criteria. In contrast, those who appear pale, sweaty, are in acute respiratory distress, or have unstable vital signs will need urgent, life-saving treatment and do qualify for level-1 criteria. Every patient with chest pain must be evaluated against the level-1 criteria to decide if immediate life-saving intervention is necessary.

When deciding if a patient needs immediate life-saving care, the triage nurse must evaluate the patient’s level of consciousness. The ESI algorithm utilizes the AVPU scale (alert, verbal, pain, unresponsive) as shown in Table 3-2. This step aims to identify patients experiencing a sudden change in consciousness. The nurse should look for deviations from the patient’s baseline, with particular concern for those who were previously alert but are now categorized as P (pain) or U (unresponsive). Unresponsiveness should be considered in the context of sudden neurological changes, and not in patients with pre-existing developmental delays, documented dementia, or aphasia. Any patient who is unresponsive—including those who are intoxicated and do not respond to painful stimuli—meets level-1 criteria and requires immediate assessment. For instance, a patient with a sudden decrease in mental status who cannot maintain their airway or is experiencing severe respiratory distress would need urgent intervention.

Users familiar with ESI version 3 (v. 3) will observe a significant modification in the criteria for ESI level 1. The primary distinction between ESI v. 3 and ESI version 4 (v. 4) is the recognition and reclassification of some of the most critically ill patients, who were previously categorized as ESI level 2. Now, patients who need immediate life-saving interventions are assigned to ESI level 1. For example, under the previous version, a patient experiencing severe respiratory distress who needed intubation but was still breathing would have been placed in ESI level 2. In the new version, this patient now qualifies for level 1. Additional examples of patients now considered ESI level 1 include those who are weak and dizzy with a heart rate of 30 or 200. While this adjustment may not impact a large number of patients, it ensures that the most critically ill are classified correctly. Before v. 4, triage nurses often faced two types of ESI level-2 patients: those needing immediate attention and those who could safely wait a short period (about 10 minutes) without worsening. This issue prompted a large, multi-center, prospective study to determine which ESI level-2 patients actually received immediate interventions (Tanabe et al., in press). The findings from that study led to the revision of the ESI system. This updated ESI handbook outlines these changes and introduces ESI v. 4.

An ESI level-1 patient does not necessarily arrive at the emergency department by ambulance. Individuals with drug overdoses or acute alcohol intoxication might be left at the entrance, while children could be brought in by car and carried inside. An experienced triage nurse can quickly recognize these critically ill patients. With a swift, visual assessment from a distance, the nurse identifies those in severe distress. These patients are promptly moved to the treatment area, where resuscitation begins immediately.

Patients classified as ESI level 1 make up about 1 to 3 percent of all emergency department cases (Eitel et al., 2003; Wuerz, Milne, Eitel, Travers & Gilboy, 2000; Wuerz et al., 2001). These patients require immediate resuscitation by either the emergency physician and nurse or the trauma or code team upon arrival. Research on ESI shows that the majority of ESI level-1 patients are admitted to intensive care units, while some die in the emergency department (Eitel et al., 2003; Wuerz, 2001). A small number of ESI level-1 patients are discharged from the ED if their altered level of consciousness or vital functions—such as those caused by hypoglycemia, seizures, alcohol intoxication, or anaphylaxis—are reversible.

Illustrations of ESI level 1:

Heart stoppage.

Cessation of breathing.

Acute difficulty breathing.

Oxygen saturation below 90%.

Severely injured trauma patient arriving in an unresponsive state.

Overdose presenting with a respiratory rate of 6.

Three general questions are utilized to assess if the patient satisfies level-2 criteria.

Is this considered a high-risk scenario?

2. Does the patient exhibit confusion, lethargy, or disorientation?

3. Is the patient experiencing significant pain or discomfort?

The triage nurse gathers relevant subjective and objective data to promptly address these questions. This section provides a concise overview of ESI level-2 criteria, with a more comprehensive discussion of patients qualifying for ESI level-2 to be covered in Chapter 4.

Severe breathing difficulty accompanied by agonal or gasping respirations.

Markedly slow or fast heart rate accompanied by evidence of inadequate tissue perfusion.

Low blood pressure accompanied by indications of inadequate tissue perfusion.

A trauma patient in need of urgent resuscitation with crystalloids and colloids.

Experiencing chest pain, appearing pale and sweaty, with a blood pressure of 70 by palpation.

Feeling weak and lightheaded, heart rate is 30.

Severe allergic response.

Infant exhibiting limpness.

Unconscious with a strong smell of alcohol.

Low blood sugar accompanied by altered mental state.

##### Decision Point B: Should the Patient Wait?

After the triage nurse establishes that the patient does not qualify for ESI level 1, they proceed to decision point B (refer to Figure 33). At this stage, the nurse must determine if the patient can safely wait to be evaluated. If waiting is not appropriate, the patient is assigned ESI level 2. If the patient can wait, the process continues to the following step in the algorithm.

###### Is This a High-risk Situation?

Drawing on a brief patient interview, general observations, and the intuition developed through experience, the triage nurse identifies patients at high risk. Often, factors such as the patient’s age and medical history play a role in this assessment. A high-risk patient is someone whose condition could quickly worsen or who shows symptoms indicating a need for urgent, time-sensitive care. This type of patient may face a significant threat to life or organ function. In most cases, a comprehensive physical exam or a complete set of vital signs is not necessary to recognize high risk. Instead, the patient may describe symptoms that an experienced triage nurse immediately recognizes as serious. For instance, a patient who says, “I never get headaches and after lifting something heavy, I now have the worst headache of my life,” would be triaged as ESI level 2, as these symptoms could indicate a subarachnoid hemorrhage.

If a patient is classified as ESI level 2, the triage nurse has determined that it is not safe for the patient to wait in the waiting area for any period of time. Although ESI does not define exact time frames, ESI level-2 patients are a high priority and should typically be placed and begin receiving treatment within 10 minutes of their arrival. It is crucial to note that even though the criteria for level 1 have broadened in version 4 of the algorithm, ESI level-2 patients are still regarded as very ill and at significant risk. Immediate care is necessary, and a suitable bed must be located right away. In most cases, instead of moving on to the next patient, the triage nurse recognizes the severity of the situation and promptly notifies the charge nurse or staff in the patient care area that there is an ESI level-2 patient.

Instances of high-risk scenarios:

Experiencing ongoing chest pain suggestive of coronary syndrome, but currently stable and not in need of urgent life-saving treatment.

A healthcare worker experiences a needlestick injury.

Shows symptoms of a stroke, but does not fulfill level-1 requirements.

Ectopic pregnancy has been ruled out; the patient is hemodynamically stable.

A patient undergoing chemotherapy, and thus immunocompromised, presenting with a fever.

A patient exhibiting suicidal or homicidal tendencies.

Chapter 4 provides further details about high-risk situations.

###### Is the Patient Confused, Lethargic, or Disoriented?

This is the second question to consider at decision point B. Once more, the focus is on determining if the patient is showing a sudden change in consciousness. Patients who are normally confused do not qualify for level-2 criteria.

Confused: Shows unsuitable reactions to stimuli, with reduced attention span and impaired memory.

Lethargic: Sleepy, spends more time sleeping than normal, but reacts properly when prompted.

Disoriented: The patient cannot accurately respond to questions regarding time, location, or identity.

Instances of patients who exhibit confusion, lethargy, or disorientation:

Recent development of confusion in an older adult.

The 3-month-old whose mother says the baby is constantly sleeping.

The teenager was discovered in a state of confusion and disorientation.

All of these examples suggest that the brain could be impaired either in its structure or its chemistry.

###### Is This Patient in Severe Pain or Distress?

At decision point B, the triage nurse’s third question is whether the patient is experiencing pain or distress. If the answer is “no,” the nurse proceeds to the next step in the process. If the answer is “yes,” the nurse must evaluate the severity of the pain or distress, using clinical observation and/or a self-reported pain score of 7 or above on a 0 to 10 scale. When a patient reports pain at 7/10 or higher, the nurse may assign an ESI level 2, but this is not mandatory. Pain is a frequent reason for emergency department visits, and not all patients with pain scores of 7/10 or more require an ESI level-2 classification. For instance, a patient with a sprained ankle and pain rated at 8/10 would typically be considered ESI level 4. Assigning a level 2 rating based solely on pain is not necessary in such cases.

In certain patients, pain can be evaluated through clinical observation, such as noting distressed facial expressions, sweating, body positioning, and alterations in vital signs. The triage nurse looks for physical signs of acute pain that validate the patient’s reported pain level. For instance, a patient experiencing abdominal pain who is sweating, has a rapid heart rate, and elevated blood pressure, or a patient with intense flank pain, vomiting, pale complexion, and a history of kidney stones, are both clear examples of individuals who qualify for ESI level-2. More details about ESI level 2 and pain assessment can be found in Chapter 4.

Severe distress may be either physical or psychological. Instances of distress include a victim of sexual assault, an aggressive patient, or a person with bipolar disorder experiencing a manic episode.

ESI level-2 patients represent a relatively small but high-risk segment, making up 20 to 30 percent of emergency department cases (Travers et al., 2002; Wuerz et al., 2001; Tanabe, Gimbel et al., 2004). After identifying an ESI level-2 patient, the triage nurse must ensure prompt care. Registration can be handled by a family member or completed at the bedside. These patients require vital signs and a thorough nursing assessment, though this does not have to occur during triage. Their placement should not be postponed to complete vital sign collection. Studies on ESI indicate that 50 to 60 percent of ESI level-2 patients are admitted from the emergency department (Wuerz et al., 2001).

##### Decision Point C: Resource Needs

If the responses to the first two decision points are “no,” the triage nurse proceeds to decision point C (refer to Figure 3-4). At this stage, the nurse should inquire, “How many different resources will this patient likely require for the physician to make a disposition decision?” The possible dispositions include discharging the patient home, admitting them to the observation unit or hospital, or transferring them to another facility. This step again calls for the triage nurse to rely on previous experience with similar emergency department cases. It is important for ED nurses to recognize that estimating resource needs is based on standards of care and is not influenced by the hospital’s type (teaching or non-teaching) or its location. Any patient arriving at an emergency department should generally utilize the same resources to reach a disposition. Taking into account the patient’s brief subjective and objective evaluation, medical history, allergies, medications, age, and gender, the nurse must determine how many different resources will be necessary for the physician to decide on a disposition. Essentially, what is the standard approach for a patient presenting to the ED with this typical complaint? The triage nurse should make this judgment based on their assessment of the patient, focusing on the usual practices in that specific ED, rather than on individual provider preferences.

To determine what resources are needed, the triage nurse should understand the standards of care in the emergency department. The nurse must also be aware of the idea of “prudent and customary.” An effective way to approach this is to consider, “Based on this patient’s main complaint or injury, what resources will the emergency physician probably use?” Resources may include hospital services, diagnostic tests, procedures, consultations, or interventions that go beyond the physician’s history and physical exam, as well as basic emergency department actions like applying a bandage. Additional details and examples can be found in Chapter 5.

Table 3-3 outlines which items are classified as resources and which are not for ESI triage purposes. Patients at ESI level 3 are expected to need two or more resources, those at ESI level 4 are anticipated to need one resource, and ESI level 5 patients are expected to need none, as shown in Table 3-4.

Studies indicate that ESI level-3 patients account for 30% to 40% of those treated in the emergency department (Eitel et al., 2003; Wuerz et al., 2001). These individuals typically need more comprehensive assessments but are considered stable in the short term, which can result in longer ED stays. ESI level 4 and 5 patients represent 20% to 35% of emergency department visits, and this percentage may be higher in areas with limited access to primary care. Properly trained mid-level providers with suitable skill sets could manage these patients in a fast-track or express care environment, especially since many present with trauma-related issues. Given their stable condition, it is generally safe for these patients to wait several hours before being seen.

##### Decision Point D:The Patient's Vital Signs

Prior to assigning a patient to ESI level 3, the nurse must review the patient’s vital signs to determine if they fall outside the normal range for the patient’s age and if these abnormalities are clinically significant. If the vital signs are abnormal, the triage nurse should consider elevating the triage level to ESI level 2. Ultimately, it is up to the triage nurse to decide whether the patient should be upgraded to ESI level 2 due to abnormal vital signs. This is referred to as decision point D.

Vital sign parameters are specified according to age (refer to Figure 3-5). The vital signs considered include pulse, respiratory rate, and oxygen saturation, with body temperature also assessed in children under three years old. Based on these criteria, a triage nurse may choose to upgrade an adult patient with a heart rate of 104, or keep them at ESI level 3. Similarly, a 6-month-old infant with a cold and a respiratory rate of 48 might be assigned to ESI level 2 or 3. The nurse must determine, using the patient’s history and physical exam, whether the vital signs indicate a high-risk situation that requires immediate attention. Chapter 6 provides a detailed discussion of vital signs and includes illustrative examples.

Temperature is considered only for children younger than three years old. A high fever may prevent young children from being placed in categories 4 and 5. This approach helps to identify children who may have bacteremia and ensures they are not directed to a fast track area or made to wait for an extended period. Detailed pediatric fever guidelines will be provided in Chapter 6.

###### Does Time to Treatment Influence ESI Triage Categories?

Estimating how long a patient can wait before being seen by a doctor is a key part of most triage systems. The Australasian and Canadian Triage Systems specify that patients must be evaluated by a physician within a set timeframe according to their triage level. In contrast, the ESI does not set strict time requirements for physician assessment. Nonetheless, patients classified as ESI level 2 should receive prompt attention, though the exact timing is determined by each institution’s policy. There is often confusion between institutional policies, the actual process of patient care, and the ESI triage level.

We will present four patient cases where there may appear to be a contradiction between patient flow and triage category. Trauma patients often arrive at triage after experiencing a significant injury mechanism, such as being an unrestrained passenger in a high-speed car accident. Sometimes, these patients do not arrive by ambulance but instead come to triage on their own, reporting localized right upper quadrant pain and having stable vital signs. Although this patient is physiologically stable, walked into the emergency department, and does not meet the criteria for ESI level 1, they are still at high risk for injuries like a liver laceration and other serious trauma, so they should be assigned ESI level 2. Many emergency departments have trauma protocols and trauma response levels that require prompt initiation of care. Both triage level and trauma response level are important and should be documented as separate scores. While the triage nurse correctly identifies this as a physiologically stable trauma patient and assigns ESI level 2, she should also ensure the patient is placed and managed according to trauma policy. The patient is likely stable for at least another 10 minutes and does not need immediate life-saving interventions. However, if the same patient arrived with a palpable blood pressure of 80, they would be classified as ESI level 1 and would need urgent, life-saving hemodynamic interventions.

Another instance of policies influencing triage level involves patients presenting with stable chest pain. If a patient is physiologically stable but has chest pain that could indicate an acute coronary syndrome, they qualify for ESI level-2. These patients do not need immediate life-saving measures but are considered high risk. Their treatment is time-sensitive, and an ECG should be completed within 10 minutes of arrival. Many emergency departments have protocols to ensure rapid ECG initiation. Although prompt care is necessary, the ECG serves as a diagnostic tool rather than a life-saving intervention. If all patients with chest pain were assigned ESI level-1, it would hinder the ability to prioritize those who truly need immediate life-saving care. However, a chest pain patient who arrives at triage sweating and with a palpable blood pressure of 80 would meet ESI level-1 criteria.

A third instance of time-sensitive care involves patients showing symptoms of an acute stroke. If the patient is physiologically stable, a delay of 10 minutes before starting treatment is unlikely to worsen their condition. However, a stroke patient who cannot maintain their airway qualifies for ESI level 1.

In another scenario, an elderly patient who has fallen and may have a hip fracture arrives with family by private car and is experiencing significant pain. Although the patient does not strictly qualify for ESI level 2, they are clearly uncomfortable. The triage nurse would assign an ESI level 3 and likely prioritize placing the patient in a bed ahead of other ESI level 3 patients. Similar situations can occur with patients arriving by ambulance. However, arriving by ambulance alone does not justify assigning ESI level 1 or 2. Triage level should always be determined using ESI criteria, regardless of how the patient arrived.

Overall, care for ESI level-2 patients should be expedited, with the goal of placing them in the treatment area within 10 minutes. It is crucial to note that although ESI version 4 has broadened level-1 criteria to include patients needing immediate interventions who were previously classified as level 2, all level-2 patients remain potentially very ill and need prompt assessment and care. The triage nurse has determined that it is unsafe for these patients to wait. While they may appear stable at present, their condition could quickly worsen, and timely diagnostic or therapeutic interventions may be critical (for example, stable chest pain requires an ECG within 10 minutes of arrival), or they may face a possible major threat to life or organ function. ESI level-2 patients are still regarded as being at very high risk.

Given the current issue of ED overcrowding, it is common for triage nurses to encounter multiple ESI level-2 patients when there are no available ED beds. In these circumstances, there may be a temptation to “undertriage,” which can result in significant harm to patients and inaccurately reflect the ED’s patient population. When several ESI level-2 patients present at the same time, the triage nurse should assess each one using the ESI algorithm. This allows the nurse to prioritize among the level-2 patients, identifying those at greatest risk, and to arrange patient placement accordingly.

##### Summary

In conclusion, the ESI is a straightforward five-level triage system that categorizes patients according to the severity of their condition and the resources they require. The ESI triage process relies on four main decision points. Using this system, an experienced emergency department nurse can quickly and accurately assess and prioritize patients.

### Chapter 4. ESI Level 2

This chapter builds upon the initial overview of the ESI, emphasizing the importance of the experienced ED nurse’s clinical judgment. The ESI triage training program should allocate significant time to clarifying which patients qualify for ESI level 2. Here, we focus on typical patient scenarios that fulfill the criteria for ESI level 2.

Once the triage nurse has established that the patient does not need urgent life-saving care, the next step is to assess whether the patient can wait. In making this judgment, the triage nurse should ask, “Would I allocate my last available bed to this patient?” The three questions outlined in Figure 4-1 must be addressed, as they are essential elements of the ESI level-2 criteria.

Is this considered a high-risk scenario?

2. Is the patient showing signs of newly developed confusion, drowsiness, or disorientation?

3. Is the patient in significant pain or discomfort?

The rest of this chapter explores the decision-making aspects of ESI level 2 in depth. Numerous examples are included, illustrating potential medical diagnoses linked to patients’ chief complaints and symptoms. An experienced triage nurse will always evaluate the patient’s chief complaint, observed signs and symptoms, demographic information, and medical history to help identify high-risk situations. Although the goal of nurse triage is not to establish a medical diagnosis, these scenarios rely on the triage nurse’s expertise regarding possible diagnoses related to specific complaints. Comprehensive resources on the signs and symptoms of various medical conditions include the Emergency Nursing Core Curriculum[©] and other emergency nursing reference books. The following section highlights selected examples of high-risk situations, though it is not meant to be all-inclusive. These examples are summarized in Table 4-1.

##### High-risk Situations

Recognizing high-risk situations is essential in the triage decision-making process, no matter which triage system is applied. The ESI emphasizes the significance of identifying high-risk cases and relies on the triage nurse’s knowledge and experience to determine which patients are at elevated risk.

There is limited literature on how emergency department triage nurses make decisions. While knowledge and experience are essential, they are not enough on their own. Another crucial element is intuition or a “sixth sense.” Novice triage nurses should be taught practical guidelines, or rules of thumb, to rely on until they gain the confidence and experience needed for quick, accurate decision-making. Examples of such guidelines include “assume all women of childbearing age are pregnant until proven otherwise” or “consider all chest pain as cardiac in origin until proven otherwise.” New triage nurses are also instructed in recognizing symptom clusters, such as the cardiac cluster of chest pain, nausea, shortness of breath, and sweating. Through previous clinical experiences, ED nurses develop what are called clinical portraits—memories of specific patient cases they have encountered. For instance, a nurse will always recall a patient with fever, stiff neck, and a meningococcal rash when seeing a similar case in the future. With each triage situation, nurses must draw upon all their accumulated knowledge and experience. Experienced triage nurses should be able to easily recognize high-risk situations.

Vital signs alone are often insufficient for identifying patients at high risk. Patients usually arrive at the emergency department with a main complaint, symptoms, or a history that points to a potentially serious issue that can quickly worsen if not addressed immediately. Factors such as the patient’s age, medical history, and current medications often affect how severe the main complaint appears. For instance, an elderly, frail patient with intense abdominal pain faces a much greater risk of complications or death compared to a healthy 20-year-old. The older patient with abdominal pain should be assigned an ESI level 2, while the younger adult with stable vital signs is generally categorized as ESI level 3. Triage nurses frequently recognize high-risk cases, which may then be supported by abnormal vital signs. For example, a patient reporting fever and a productive cough might have a respiratory rate of 32 and an oxygen saturation of 90 percent. An experienced triage nurse can use their knowledge to determine that this patient likely has pneumonia, is at risk for further oxygen desaturation, and should be considered high risk. In contrast, less experienced emergency department nurses may lack the necessary skills to reliably identify high-risk situations and make correct triage decisions. As a result, an inexperienced triage nurse can be a liability, regardless of the triage system in place. They have not yet developed the ability to use symptom patterns, clinical scenarios, or intuition—methods that are essential for recognizing high-risk patients. The following section will outline specific examples of high-risk situations.

###### Abdominal and Gastrointestinal

Abdominal pain is a common reason for visits to the emergency department. What factors make it high risk? Taking a thorough history and evaluating the current pain level, respiratory rate, and heart rate are key components that help identify high-risk cases. Pain severity is just one aspect to consider. If severe abdominal pain is accompanied by tachycardia or respiratory distress, this may indicate shock and puts the patient at higher risk. Elderly patients with severe abdominal pain are also at increased risk, as they are more likely to suffer from bowel obstructions, gastrointestinal bleeding, and other abdominal issues that carry greater morbidity and mortality compared to younger individuals. It is crucial to look for signs and symptoms of an acute abdomen in all patients presenting with abdominal pain. Important questions include: How long has the pain been present? What prompted the patient to seek emergency care today? Has the patient experienced significant nausea, vomiting, or diarrhea? Is there evidence of dehydration? Patients who report severe, “tearing” abdominal pain that radiates to the back should be evaluated for a possible abdominal aortic aneurysm. This pain is typically described as intense, constant, and of sudden onset, and these patients may have a history of hypertension.

Patients presenting with abdominal pain are frequently assigned an ESI level 3 at the start of the triage assessment, but if tachycardia or additional risk factors are identified, the triage nurse may reassess and classify the patient as high risk.

Vomiting blood or presenting with blood per rectum requires careful assessment, taking vital signs into account. A 30-year-old with bright red rectal bleeding, stable vital signs, and no additional risk factors does not qualify for ESI level 2. However, an older adult who called emergency services due to vomiting blood and has a heart rate of 117 and a respiratory rate of 24 is considered high risk and does meet the criteria for ESI level 2.

###### Cardiovascular

Chest pain is a frequent reason for seeking medical care. The symptoms of acute coronary syndromes (ACS) can be vague, making it challenging to assess ACS risk during triage. Patients experiencing chest or epigastric discomfort, whether or not they have additional symptoms, typically require a prompt ECG to check for ACS and should be considered high risk—classified as ESI level 2. Triage nurses must be aware of how heart disease can present differently, especially in women. For instance, a 54-year-old obese woman presenting to the emergency department with epigastric pain and fatigue is at risk for ACS and should be assigned to ESI level 2 as high risk. Patients with chest pain who are unstable and need immediate interventions like intubation or hemodynamic support should be triaged as ESI level 1. Not all patients with chest pain fall into level 1 or 2 categories; for example, a healthy 20-year-old with chest pain, cough, and a fever of 101°F is at low risk for ACS and does not meet ESI level 1 or 2 criteria. Each case must be evaluated individually. Other high-risk cardiovascular conditions include possible hypertensive emergencies, acute arterial occlusions, and patients presenting with fever after valve replacement surgery.

###### Dental, Ear, Nose, and Throat

While less frequent, epiglottitis still occurs and poses a possible threat to the airway. Peritonsillar abscess is another condition that can potentially compromise the airway, and both are considered high-risk situations. If a patient with either condition is at immediate risk of airway obstruction and needs urgent intervention, they meet level-1 criteria. For patients presenting with epistaxis, the triage nurse should check blood pressure, even though this step is not included in the ESI algorithm. Causes of epistaxis may include a posterior nosebleed from a hypertensive crisis, nose picking in a patient taking Coumadin®, or recent cocaine use. Regardless of the cause, these patients should be assigned ESI level 2, as they are considered high risk.

###### Environmental

Individuals with inhalation injuries are at elevated risk for airway obstruction. If a patient exhibits marked airway distress necessitating urgent intervention, they fulfill level-1 criteria.

###### Facial

Individuals who have sustained facial trauma need to be assessed for potential facial fractures. Such fractures frequently occur alongside other serious injuries and can result in airway obstruction, making it essential to classify these cases as high risk. If facial trauma leads to actual airway compromise, the patient should be assigned an ESI level 1 to ensure prompt airway intervention. Cases with a significant risk of airway compromise should be triaged as ESI level 2.

###### General Medical

A number of other general medical issues should be evaluated for potential high-risk scenarios. These complications include diabetic ketoacidosis, abnormal blood sugar levels (either high or low), sepsis, episodes of fainting or near-fainting, and various electrolyte imbalances that may require urgent intervention. Hyperkalemia, in particular, poses a significant risk as it can cause dangerous heart rhythm disturbances. This condition should be considered in dialysis patients who present with weakness. Additionally, cancer patients receiving chemotherapy who develop a fever are at increased risk for sepsis and must be recognized as high-risk and assessed promptly.

###### Genitourinary

Men experiencing testicular torsion typically report intense pain, are readily identifiable, and need prompt assessment, surgical treatment, and immediate pain management. Patients on renal dialysis who are unable to finish their treatment also represent a high-risk genitourinary emergency due to the potential for multiple electrolyte imbalances. Both women and, more frequently, men may arrive at triage with sudden urinary retention. Men over 65 often present with benign prostatic hypertrophy leading to an inability to urinate. Both genders may also be unable to void following surgery. These individuals are in significant distress and require urgent urinary catheterization. Such cases involve patients in severe distress and should be assigned an ESI level 2.

###### Mental Health

Patients presenting with mental health issues are considered high risk if they pose a threat to themselves, others, or their surroundings. Individuals who are suicidal, homicidal, psychotic, violent, or at risk of fleeing should be classified as high risk. Intoxication alone, without evidence of trauma or risk of aspiration, does not qualify as high risk. However, intoxicated patients should be thoroughly evaluated for trauma or behavioral problems linked to alcohol use or their medical history. If either is present, the situation may be high risk, and the patient should be assigned an ESI level 2.

###### Neurological

Patients experiencing severe headaches along with changes in mental status, elevated blood pressure, lethargy, fever, or a rash should be regarded as high risk. Additionally, any individual who suddenly develops speech difficulties or motor weakness should be categorized as ESI level 2. These symptoms may indicate an acute stroke, making prompt assessment essential. The time since symptom onset is a key consideration in selecting treatment options, especially for fibrinolytic or other interventions. If a patient with no prior history of headaches arrives at the emergency department with a sudden headache, they should be considered at high risk for a subarachnoid hemorrhage. Such patients often recall the exact activity they were engaged in when the headache started, commonly after lifting, having a bowel movement, or during sexual activity.

###### Obstetrical and Gynecological

Women presenting with abdominal pain or vaginal bleeding should be thoroughly evaluated, and vital signs should be checked unless there is an immediate life-threatening condition. For all women of reproductive age, it is essential to obtain a pregnancy history and determine the date of the last menstrual period. The triage nurse should look for symptoms of abruptio placentae and placenta previa in women who are in late pregnancy. In early pregnancy, assessment should focus on identifying signs of ectopic pregnancy and spontaneous abortion. Pregnant patients who are between 14 and 20 weeks gestation or further along should be promptly evaluated by a physician, following the specific guidelines of the institution. Postpartum women who report heavy vaginal bleeding should also receive urgent medical attention from a physician. Any woman, whether pregnant or postpartum, who exhibits significant hemodynamic instability and requires immediate life-saving measures should be assigned an ESI level 1 during triage.

###### Ocular

Patients who experience eye trauma, sudden partial or complete vision loss, or chemical exposure to the eye are at significant risk for lasting eye damage and should be assigned to ESI level 2 triage. Visual loss can be caused by conditions such as central retinal artery occlusion, acute narrow-angle glaucoma, and retinal detachment. Eye injuries may lead to globe rupture or hyphema. Chemical exposures, especially from alkali substances, require prompt irrigation to minimize corneal injury. Each of these situations demands urgent assessment and intervention to avoid further harm or worsening of the condition. These cases fulfill the requirements for ESI level 2. Although immediate eye irrigation is critical, it is not classified as a life-saving measure, so these patients do not qualify for ESI level 1.

###### Orthopedic

Patients exhibiting signs and symptoms of compartment syndrome face a significant risk of losing the affected limb and should be categorized as ESI level 2. Other orthopedic injuries considered high-risk include any limb injury with impaired neurovascular status, partial or complete amputations, or injuries resulting from mechanisms known to be high-risk, such as severe acceleration or deceleration. Patients suspected of having fractures of the pelvis, femur, or hip, as well as those with other limb dislocations, require thorough assessment and monitoring of vital signs. These types of fractures can lead to substantial blood loss. If a patient is hemodynamically unstable and requires immediate life-saving intervention, they should be classified as ESI level 1.

###### Pediatrics

Triage nurses often feel uneasy when determining the acuity level for pediatric patients, particularly infants. Gathering a precise history from the caregiver and assessing the child’s activity are crucial steps. A child who cannot be comforted or who appears withdrawn may be at significant risk for severe illness. The situations below illustrate examples of high-risk conditions in children:

Convulsions.

Severe dehydration and sepsis.

A complication of diabetes known as diabetic ketoacidosis.

Burns resulting from child abuse.

Injury to the head.

Overdoses or ingestion of vitamins, iron, or other substances.

An infant younger than 28 days old who has a temperature of 100.4° F (38° C) or higher.

###### Transplant

Patients who have undergone organ transplantation are typically unwell and classified as high risk. They may develop organ rejection, sepsis, or other complications. Individuals awaiting transplantation are also generally regarded as high risk.

###### Respiratory

Numerous respiratory issues can put patients at significant risk. Those experiencing mild to moderate distress should undergo further assessment of their respiratory rate and pulse oximetry to decide if they should be classified as ESI level 2. Patients who are in severe respiratory distress and need immediate lifesaving measures, such as intubation, qualify for level-1 categorization. A high-risk patient is someone who is currently breathing and oxygenating sufficiently but is in respiratory distress and could quickly worsen. Causes of respiratory distress may include asthma, pulmonary embolism, pleural effusion, pneumothorax, inhalation of a foreign object, exposure to toxic smoke, or shortness of breath accompanied by chest pain.

###### Toxicological

The majority of patients presenting with an overdose require prompt assessment, as these cases are considered high risk. Identifying the specific substances ingested and their amounts is frequently challenging. If the overdose was intentional and the patient expresses suicidal thoughts, this also qualifies as a high-risk scenario. Patients who arrive without breathing or need urgent lifesaving measures should be assigned ESI level 1, while all other admitted overdose cases should be classified as ESI level 2.

###### Trauma

Often, patients who have experienced a traumatic event are at significant risk for injury, even if no visible injuries are present. Any injury mechanism that carries a high risk should be classified as ESI level 2, unless the patient has unstable vital signs and needs immediate intervention, in which case they should be assigned ESI level 1. Serious injuries occur due to the transfer of mechanical or kinetic energy, typically from acceleration, deceleration, or both. Examples include motor vehicle and motorcycle accidents, falls, and gunshot or stab wounds, all of which involve blunt or penetrating trauma and require thorough assessment for possible severe injury. The triage nurse should gather information such as the patient’s age, any pre-existing medical or environmental conditions, the height of a fall or jump, the speed of the vehicle involved, any history of loss of consciousness, the site of a penetrating injury, and the type of weapon used. The nurse will use their understanding of biomechanics and injury mechanisms to evaluate the patient and determine if they meet ESI level 2 criteria. Gunshot wounds to the head, neck, chest, or groin generally necessitate trauma team involvement and immediate care, and should be triaged as ESI level 1.

###### Wound Management

What factors classify a wound as high risk? Is there ongoing, uncontrolled bleeding? Is there evidence of arterial bleeding? Does the injury involve a partial amputation? Consider how the wound occurred and whether the mechanism of injury puts the patient at increased risk for additional traumatic complications. The majority of wounds do not qualify for ESI level 2. For example, a patient with a stab wound to the thigh that only affects the subcutaneous tissue, has bleeding under control, and maintains good distal neurological function would be categorized as ESI level 4. However, any wound with uncontrolled bleeding that demands immediate, lifesaving intervention to stabilize the patient falls under level 1 criteria.

##### Confusion/Lethargy/ Disorientation

The second consideration when assessing if a patient qualifies for level-2 criteria is whether they are experiencing new confusion, lethargy, or disorientation. Changes in mental status are a common reason for seeking care. Patients with these symptoms are often brought to the emergency department by relatives, friends, or emergency personnel. At decision point B in the ESI algorithm, confusion, lethargy, or disorientation refers specifically to a recent or sudden change in consciousness. Ongoing dementia or chronic confusion does not satisfy the requirements for ESI level 2. Acute confusion, lethargy, or disorientation can result from several serious medical issues, such as stroke, transient ischemic attack, other brain structural abnormalities, metabolic or electrolyte disturbances like hypoglycemia or hyponatremia, and toxicological problems.

This part of the algorithm is typically straightforward and offers minimal room for misinterpretation. When a patient arrives at triage with an unknown medical history and is confused, lethargic, or disoriented, the triage nurse should presume these symptoms are new and assign an ESI level 2 triage category. Additionally, if the patient exhibits new confusion, lethargy, or disorientation and needs an immediate life-saving intervention as outlined earlier, they qualify for ESI level 1.

##### Severe Pain/Distress

The last consideration in deciding if the patient qualifies for level-2 criteria is whether they are experiencing severe pain or distress. The patient must be evaluated for signs of significant pain or distress. Any patient reporting a pain score of 7 out of 10 or higher should be evaluated for ESI level-2 criteria.

The word "considered" holds significant importance. It is ultimately the triage nurse’s judgment to decide if the combination of the patient’s clinical condition and reported pain level justifies assigning an ESI level 2. For instance, a patient whose toe was struck by a heavy metal object might report their pain as 10 out of 10. The patient could indeed have a fracture and be in intense pain, and may not have attempted any pain relief before arriving at the emergency department. In this scenario, the appropriate triage level would be ESI level 4, as only one resource—an x-ray—will be required. The triage nurse should provide comfort measures at triage, such as applying ice, elevating the foot, and administering pain medication if protocols allow, to help alleviate the pain. The nurse should accept the patient’s report of severe pain and address it during triage. Nevertheless, this patient can safely wait to be seen and should not be prioritized for the last available bed. In conclusion, the triage nurse evaluates not just the patient’s reported pain score, but also considers the main complaint, medical history, and the patient’s physical presentation when assigning a triage level. Patients for whom severe pain could justify an ESI level 2 rating include:

A patient experiencing severe (10/10) flank pain and visibly restless during triage.

An 80-year-old woman experiencing generalized abdominal pain rated 7 out of 10, accompanied by intense nausea.

A 30-year-old individual experiencing an acute pain crisis due to sickle cell disease.

A cancer patient experiencing intense pain.

Any burn, whether full-thickness or partial-thickness, that necessitates prompt pain management.

All emergency department patients should be evaluated for pain and asked to rate their pain using a tool like the visual analog scale. Many triage nurses feel uneasy about recording a patient’s pain score and then having the patient wait to be seen. It is crucial for triage nurses to recognize that a patient’s self-reported pain score is just one aspect of the overall pain assessment. For instance, triage nurses often encounter patients who are laughing, talking on the phone, or eating snacks, yet claim their pain is 10 or higher. Triage nurses should assign an ESI level 2 if a patient reports a pain score of 7 out of 10 or more and the nurse’s subjective and objective evaluation indicates that the pain requires interventions beyond what can be provided at triage. In such cases, the triage nurse determines that it would not be appropriate for the patient to wait and assigns them to the last available bed.

Ultimately, when deciding if a patient qualifies for ESI level-2, the triage nurse needs to evaluate for severe distress, which can be either physiological or psychological. Besides pain, patients with significant respiratory distress fulfill the physiological criteria for ESI level 2. Severe psychological distress may be seen in patients who are:

Deeply upset following a sexual assault.

Displaying disruptive behavior during triage.

Aggressive.

Individuals who have experienced domestic abuse.

Undergoing an intense response to grief.

These patients are typically prioritized by the triage nurse to be taken directly to the treatment area, allowing them to bypass the waiting room.

##### Summary

We have examined the essential elements and questions required to assess if a patient qualifies for ESI level-2. It is vital for the triage nurse to take these questions into account when evaluating every patient. Overlooking a high-risk scenario could lead to longer wait times and possibly adverse outcomes for the patient.

### Chapter 5. Expected Resource Needs

Historically, triage systems have relied exclusively on assessing the severity of a patient’s condition. In these systems, nurses determine an acuity level by judging how long a patient can safely wait before being evaluated by a healthcare provider. The Emergency Severity Index (ESI) introduces a different method by not only considering which patients require immediate attention, but also, for those with less severe conditions, estimating the resources that will likely be needed to manage their care. This chapter provides background on the rationale for incorporating resource prediction into the ESI and explains what is considered a resource. It also presents examples of patients classified as ESI levels 3 to 5, along with the anticipated resources each will require.

Traditionally, comprehensive triage has served as the primary approach for assigning triage acuity in U.S. emergency departments (Emergency Nurses Association [ENA], 1997, pp. 3-10; Gilboy, Travers & Wuerz, 1999). These triage systems rely on the nurse’s evaluation of vital signs, both subjective and objective data, medical history, allergies, and current medications to establish the level of triage acuity.

Predicting resource needs is a key component of the ESI for patients categorized as ESI level 3, 4, or 5. It is essential to note that resource allocation is not considered for patients with high acuity, such as those at ESI level 1 or 2. Resource prediction sets the ESI apart from other triage systems that focus solely on acuity. When Drs. Wuerz and Eitel developed the ESI triage system, they incorporated resource utilization to provide additional information and enable more precise triage decisions. They believed that experienced emergency department (ED) triage nurses could anticipate the types and quantities of tests, treatments, and consultations a patient would require during their ED visit. This has been supported by recent studies on ESI implementation and validation, which have demonstrated that triage nurses can accurately predict the resource needs of ED patients (Eitel, Travers, Rosenau, Gilboy & Wuerz, 2003; Tanabe, Gimbel, Yarnold & Adams, 2004). One such study, conducted across seven EDs in diverse geographic locations, including both urban and rural settings as well as academic and community hospitals, found that nurses using the ESI correctly predicted the number of resources needed by ED patients 70 percent of the time. In other words, experienced triage nurses using the ESI can reliably estimate at triage how many resources a patient will need to reach a disposition in the ED, and, more importantly, can distinguish between patients who will require low versus high resource intensity. This ability to differentiate based on resource needs enables more efficient patient flow at ED presentation by directing patients into different operational pathways, allowing for parallel processing. Additionally, research has shown that ESI triage levels are associated with significant patient outcomes, such as admission and mortality rates (Eitel et al., 2003).

It is important to remember that resource prediction applies only to patients who are less acutely ill. At decision points A and B in the ESI algorithm (Figure 5-1), the nurse determines if patients qualify for ESI levels 1 or 2 solely based on how severe their condition is. At decision point C, however, the nurse assigns ESI levels 3 through 5 by evaluating both the patient’s acuity and the resources they are likely to require. Therefore, the triage nurse takes resource needs into account only if the responses to decision points A and B are “no.”

To determine what resources ED patients require, the triage nurse should have a broad understanding of emergency department care standards and, more precisely, know what is considered reasonable and typical emergency care. A simple way to approach this is to consider, “Based on this patient’s main complaint, which resources are emergency providers most likely to use?”

The triage nurse relies on information gathered from a brief subjective and objective assessment, along with details such as past medical history, current medications, age, and gender, to estimate how many different resources the ED provider will require to make a decision about the patient’s care. For instance, a healthy teenager with a straightforward leg laceration and no significant medical history would likely need just one resource: suturing. Conversely, an elderly patient with several chronic conditions and no prior episodes of dizziness who arrives with a head laceration from a fall will obviously require multiple resources, such as suturing, laboratory tests, ECG, imaging, or specialist consultations. Proper application of ESI triage depends on the nurse’s ability to anticipate resource needs, making it a task best suited for an experienced emergency nurse. Overall, regardless of the triage system in place, we maintain that triage should be conducted by a skilled emergency nurse to ensure patient safety.

Table 5-1 (also referenced as Table 3-1) outlines the guidelines for classifying resources within the ESI triage system. The distinction between ESI levels 3, 4, and 5 is based on the nurse’s assessment of the number of resources a patient will require for disposition. According to the triage nurse’s judgment, patients anticipated to need no resources are assigned to level 5, those expected to need one resource are placed in level 4, and patients likely to require two or more resources are categorized as ESI level 3. Research has shown that patients needing two or more resources experience higher rates of hospital admission, increased mortality, and longer emergency department stays (Eitel et al., 2003; Tanabe et al., 2004 Reliability and validity).

While Table 5-1 does not include every possible resource, it offers general direction regarding the types of diagnostic tests, procedures, and treatments that are considered resources within the ESI system. Emergency nurses using the ESI should avoid focusing too much on the specific definitions of each resource. The key point is that ESI only requires the triage nurse to estimate the resources a patient will likely need during their ED visit. Table 5-1 lists the most frequently used resources, but it is neither feasible nor necessary to list every potential ED resource. For accurate ESI assignment, it is sufficient to determine whether a patient will require no resources, one resource, or two or more resources. Once a triage nurse identifies two likely resources, further estimation is unnecessary. The main purpose of the ESI resource component is to distinguish patients with more complex, resource-intensive needs from those with simpler issues. For ESI triage, resources are defined as interventions that go beyond a basic exam or minor interventions by ED staff, or that involve personnel outside the ED. Resources that demand significant ED staff time (such as administering IV medications or inserting a chest tube) or require assistance from outside departments (like radiology for x-rays or surgical consultations) tend to increase the patient’s length of stay in the ED and reflect a higher level of patient complexity and triage priority.

There are frequently asked questions regarding what qualifies as an ESI resource. One common question concerns how many blood or urine tests and x-rays count as a resource. According to the ESI triage system, the triage nurse should consider the number of different types of resources required to decide the patient’s disposition, rather than counting each individual test.

A complete blood count (CBC) and an electrolyte panel together make up a single laboratory test resource.

A complete blood count and a chest x-ray are two types of diagnostic tools (laboratory test and imaging).

A CBC and a urinalysis are both laboratory tests, and when performed together, they are considered a single resource.

A chest x-ray and standard skull radiographs are one type of resource (x-ray).

Cervical spine X-rays and a head CT scan are two imaging resources (X-ray and CT scan).

Another commonly debated resource is the use of a splint, which is not considered a resource. If it were, patients with ankle sprains would be classified as ESI level 3 (requiring an x-ray and splint). Although applying a splint can require significant effort, it’s crucial to remember that resource prediction is solely intended to categorize patients and ensure they are directed to the appropriate area within the ED. In many emergency departments, ESI level-3 patients are not suitable for fast track or urgent care sections. Triage scores do not reflect the overall intensity of nursing workload.

Another frequently asked question about ESI resources concerns the inclusion of eye irrigation as a resource. Patients who experience a chemical splash to the eye are typically classified as ESI level-2 due to the high-risk nature of their injury, so the need for eye irrigation does not influence their ESI level. On the other hand, if the eye issue is caused by dust particles, the patient is not automatically considered high risk. In such cases, eye irrigation is counted as a resource, and the patient would be assigned to ESI level-4. Performing an eye exam is not considered a resource since it is part of the standard physical examination. Additional questions about resources are discussed in the Frequently Asked Questions section of Chapter 5 in Appendix A.

Clinicians often ask about the items categorized as “not resources” in Table 5-1. This list is designed to help triage nurses efficiently and accurately assign patients to one of five clinically distinct levels (Wuerz, Milne, Eitel, Travers & Gilboy, 2000). Items considered not to be resources include physical examinations, point-of-care testing, and procedures that generally do not increase a patient’s length of stay in the emergency department or suggest greater complexity. Because it is standard practice for all ED patients to receive a basic history and physical exam, these assessments—including pelvic exams—are not counted as resources for ESI classification. The strength of the ESI lies in its straightforwardness; the main aim of identifying resources is to distinguish patients with more complex needs who require two or more resources (level 3 or higher) from those with less complicated issues who will likely need fewer than two resources (level 4 or 5). Emergency nurses should avoid overcomplicating the ESI by focusing too much on the specifics of resource definitions. In most cases, a patient will need either no resources, one resource, or two or more resources.

Although resource use can differ depending on the location, provider, or even the individual patient, triage nurses are encouraged to base their ESI resource predictions on the typical management of the most frequent presenting issues. Ideally, patients with similar complaints should require roughly the same resources at any emergency department. For instance, if an 82-year-old nursing home resident with an in-dwelling urinary catheter presents with fever and cough, the provider will likely order blood tests, urine tests, and a chest x-ray. The triage nurse can reasonably anticipate that this patient will need two or more resources and should therefore assign an ESI level 3.

While there may be slight differences in procedures among various emergency departments, these usually do not significantly impact the triage rating. For instance, some departments perform pregnancy tests within the ED (which ESI does not count as a resource), while others send the tests to the lab (which ESI does count as a resource). However, it is uncommon for patients to require only a pregnancy test, as most will need at least one additional resource. One operational difference that could lead to varying ESI levels is how patients with a sole complaint of sore throat are managed. In some hospitals, throat cultures are routinely taken (counted as one resource, ESI level 4), whereas in others, they are not (no resources, ESI level 5). Another example is the application of the Ottawa Ankle Rules, which help determine if an ankle x-ray is necessary for patients with ankle injuries. The use of these rules differs between institutions; those that implement them at triage may order fewer x-rays compared to those that do not use the rules regularly.

Temperature is a key factor in evaluating the allocation of resources for infants and young children. This topic will be discussed in Chapter 6.

Clinically, patients classified as ESI level 4 and 5 can wait several hours before being seen by a provider. However, from a customer service perspective, these patients may be more appropriately managed in a fast-track or urgent care environment. Mid-level practitioners with the right skill set and supervision are capable of treating level-4 and 5 patients. The ESI system also offers an operational benefit, as level-5 patients can occasionally be accommodated for a quick assessment and disposition by a provider, even when the department is full. Frequently, triage policies specify that ESI level-4 or 5 patients may be directed to an urgent care or fast-track area.

In conclusion, the ESI introduces a novel method for emergency department triage by incorporating predictions regarding the number of resources required to determine patient disposition. For patients classified as ESI levels 3, 4, and 5, resource needs are factored into the triage level, whereas decisions for ESI levels 1 and 2 rely solely on the severity of the patient’s condition. Table 5-2 provides examples of patients in ESI levels 3, 4, and 5. In practice, estimating resource needs has proven highly useful for managing the large volume of patients presenting with non-acute issues.

### Chapter 6.The Role of Vital Signs in ESI Triage

##### Introduction Figure 6-1. Danger Zone Vital Signs

This chapter centers on decision point D, which involves evaluating the patient's vital signs. By this stage in the ESI algorithm, the triage nurse has already established that the patient does not qualify for ESI level 1 or 2 and will need two or more resources. Because the patient requires at least two resources, they are classified as at least ESI level 3. At this juncture, the nurse reviews the patient's vital signs, including heart rate, respiratory rate, and oxygen saturation, and, for children under three, temperature. If any of the vital signs exceed the danger zone thresholds (as shown in decision point D, Figure 6-1), the nurse should seriously consider upgrading the patient from level 3 to level 2.

In the ESI triage training program, significant time should be allocated to discussing how vital signs impact the decision to reclassify a patient from ESI level 3 to ESI level 2. It is important to emphasize that the experienced triage nurse is ultimately responsible for determining if a patient qualifies for ESI level 2, taking into account the patient’s medical history, current medications, and both subjective and objective assessments, including overall appearance. This determination relies on the nurse’s clinical expertise and understanding of normal vital sign ranges for all age groups, as well as the effects of factors like medications, medical history, and pain level.

##### What Are Vital Signs?

Vital signs are typically basic measurements of physiological functions such as temperature, blood pressure, pulse, respiratory rate, and pulse oximetry (refer to Table 6-1). These measurements often guide healthcare professionals in making clinical decisions. In recent years, nursing literature has increasingly highlighted the significance of pain, with the American Pain Society introducing the term “Pain: the fifth vital sign” to raise awareness about the need for thorough pain assessment and management. Evaluating pain is a key part of the ESI and is actually considered earlier in its process. Specifically for ESI, heart rate, respiratory rate, oxygen saturation, and temperature in children under three years old are the vital sign parameters used at decision point D. Vital signs provide objective information that helps determine a patient’s general health status and viability. The results influence how we assess a patient’s overall condition and guide our choices in diagnosis and treatment. Nevertheless, vital signs alone do not offer a complete understanding of a patient’s health. They can be influenced by various factors, including prescription drugs, herbal supplements, and recreational substances. For instance, beta-blockers can cause a slower heart rate and mask the typical rapid heart rate seen in shock. Hypothyroidism, especially in older adults, may result in low body temperature even during severe infections like sepsis. Similarly, a young adult’s elevated temperature could be due to recreational drug use.

Vital signs are fluctuating, dynamic markers that supplement a patient’s assessment. Their measurement can depend on the person taking them, and what is considered normal varies depending on the source referenced. Even in optimal circumstances, vital signs may not always be dependable or precise (Edmonds, Mower, Lovato & Lomeli, 2002). Often, the patient’s overall appearance and clinical context are most informative. Nevertheless, if a triage nurse believes that obtaining vital signs would assist in evaluating risk, they should be recorded. For instance, if a patient is on immunosuppressive drugs, undergoing chemotherapy, or has an illness like AIDS that suppresses the immune system, it is important to check their body temperature.

##### Are Vital Signs Necessary at Triage?

Before the introduction of five-level triage in the United States, it was customary for every patient arriving at an emergency department to have their vital signs measured prior to being assigned a triage level. Vital signs were viewed as a crucial part of the initial nursing evaluation and frequently guided decision-making. In the traditional three-level triage system, vital signs played a key role in determining how long a patient could safely wait for care; if vital signs were normal, patients were often allowed to wait longer. As a result, vital signs historically carried significant weight in triage assessments, sometimes more so than the patient’s clinical presentation.

In recent years, updated triage models have recommended the selective use of vital signs during triage (Gilboy, Travers & Wuerz, 2000). Collecting initial vital signs is not a required part of other five-level triage systems and is generally not performed during the triage of level-1 or level-2 patients, who are the most critically ill. For instance, the Guidelines for Implementation of the Australasian Triage Scale in Emergency Departments specify that “vital signs should only be measured at triage if required to estimate urgency, or if time permits” (Australasian College for Emergency Medicine, 2000). Likewise, the Canadian Triage and Acuity Scale (CTAS) states that vital signs are only needed if they are essential for determining the triage level, particularly for levels 3, 4, and 5, and only if time allows (Beveridge et al., 2002). The Manchester Triage Group incorporates specific vital sign criteria as decision points within its flow chart, using these parameters as one of several factors to help the triage nurse determine the patient’s acuity level.

Vital signs are not always the best method for determining triage acuity. Some research indicates that taking vital signs may not be essential during the initial triage assessment. In 2002, Cooper, Flaherty, Lin, and Hubbell investigated how vital signs influence triage status, also taking into account factors like age and communication skills. Their study involved over 14,000 patients across 24 U.S. emergency departments. The findings revealed that vital signs altered the triage acuity level in only 8% of cases. When analyzing specific age groups, the greatest change was seen in pediatric patients aged 2 or younger, with an 11.4% shift in triage decisions after vital signs were obtained.

##### Vital Signs and ESI Triage

With ESI triage, the only strict requirement to check vital signs applies to patients who do not initially qualify for ESI level 1 or 2, but are expected to need two or more resources. For patients assigned to ESI levels 1, 2, 4, or 5, taking vital signs during triage is optional and left to the triage nurse’s judgment. Although the ESI system does not mandate vital sign assessment for every patient at triage, individual institutions may have their own protocols. Hospital policies regarding vital sign checks at triage are influenced by factors like staffing, patient mix, and available resources, which are not addressed in this handbook. Generally, it is always acceptable to take vital signs when triaging a stable patient. ESI specifically requires vital signs only for level-3 patients. (Refer to Table 6-2)

The creators of the ESI and the current research team agree that experienced emergency department nurses can incorporate vital sign information alongside their clinical judgment when assigning ESI ratings to patients. However, there is limited evidence linking abnormal vital signs to emergency department acuity or confirming that these abnormalities reliably indicate serious illness. The ESI has been updated over time to incorporate new evidence and recommendations from the literature. Initially, the ESI working group relied on systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS) research (Rangel-Frausto et al., 1995) to develop the danger zone vital sign criteria and related footnotes. The first ESI version used SIRS criteria, including a heart rate over 90 in adults, as a definitive reason to upgrade a patient from ESI level 3 to level 2 (Wuerz, Milne, Eitel, Traers & Gilboy, 2000). Since the SIRS studies focused on mortality predictors in intensive care unit patients, and because these criteria produced too many false positives among ED patients in the initial ESI hospitals, the heart rate threshold was raised to 100 in ESI version 2. Nurses were then advised to consider upgrading adult patients with heart rates above 100 to ESI level 2 (Wuerz et al., 2001; Gilboy, Tanabe, Travers, Eitel & Wuerz, 2003). The danger zone vital signs box was also updated to include pediatric vital sign parameters.

When applying ESI as a triage method, it is not required to assess vital signs in the triage area for patients who are promptly assigned to level 1 or 2. If a patient appears unstable or has a primary complaint that demands immediate intervention, they should be quickly moved to the treatment area. In such cases, the resuscitation team will obtain and monitor vital signs at the bedside. This includes patients whose clinical presentation suggests a high risk or an urgent need for cardiovascular or respiratory support, such as those who look pale, sweaty, or cyanotic. Nevertheless, the triage nurse may choose to check vital signs in the triage area if there is no available bed or if they believe that vital sign data could help determine the correct triage level. Some patients may only be recognized as ESI level 1 after their vital signs are measured. For instance, an elderly patient who is awake and alert but complains of dizziness may be found to have a critical condition if their heart rate is discovered to be 32 or 180 during the assessment.

As outlined in the ESI algorithm in Chapter 3, when patients do not qualify for ESI level-1 or 2, the triage nurse proceeds to decision point C. At this stage, the nurse evaluates how many resources the patient is likely to require in the emergency department. If only one or no resources are anticipated, the patient can be categorized as ESI level 4 or 5, and a vital sign check is not needed. However, if two or more resources are expected, the nurse moves to decision point D, where vital signs should be measured. Vital signs are particularly significant for some patients during triage, especially those assigned to ESI level 3, as they can provide additional evidence of possible serious illness. If any vital signs fall within the danger zone, it is advised that the triage nurse consider upgrading the patient’s level from 3 to 2.

The ESI triage system specifically incorporates heart rate, respiratory rate, and oxygen saturation (for patients who may have respiratory issues) as vital signs. Temperature is only factored into ESI triage for children younger than three years old. Notably, blood pressure is not part of the ESI algorithm when evaluating abnormal vital signs. However, this does not imply that triage nurses should avoid measuring blood pressure or temperature in older children or adults; rather, these measurements are not typically used to determine the correct triage acuity level.

##### Vital Signs and Pediatric Fever

In this edition of the ESI Handbook, version 4 (v.4) of the ESI algorithm has been revised to reflect updated pediatric fever guidelines. As illustrated in Figure 6-2, note D of the ESI algorithm covers pediatric fever criteria relevant to ESI triage. This part includes guidance from the American College of Emergency Physicians’ Clinical Policy for Children Under Three Years Old Presenting to the Emergency Department With Fever (ACEP, 2003).

The ESI Triage Research Team advises that vital signs should be checked in patients younger than 3 years old during triage. Specifically, taking a temperature is crucial for all children from birth up to 36 months, and assessing vital signs is a key part of evaluating any infant under 36 months with a known fever (Baraff, 2000). This process helps distinguish between ESI level-2 and level-3 patients and reduces the chance that children who may have bacteremia are inappropriately directed to express care or made to wait too long. It is important to note that any patient who is at immediate risk or in serious danger will be categorized as ESI level 1 or 2.

Table 6-3 offers guidance to triage nurses on using the ESI to evaluate febrile children and select the most suitable triage level. Fever is commonly defined as a rectal temperature above 38.0° C (100.4° F) (Baraff et al., 1993; ACEP, 2003). Infants younger than 28 days with a fever should be regarded as high risk and given at least an ESI level 2. For infants aged 28 days to 3 months, there are no definitive guidelines. The ESI research team advises triage nurses to follow their hospital’s protocols. It is recommended that nurses consider assigning at least an ESI level 2 to these patients.

In version 4 of the ESI, we have adopted a different set of guidelines for managing fever in children aged 3 to 36 months. These guidelines focus on children with high fevers, defined as a temperature above 39.0° C (102.2° F) (ACEP, 2003). When evaluating a highly febrile child in this age group, the triage nurse should determine the child’s immunization status and whether there is a clear source for the fever. If the child is not fully immunized or if no source for the fever can be identified, the child should be categorized as at least ESI level 3. If the child’s immunizations are current and there is an identifiable cause for the fever, an ESI level of 4 or 5 is suitable. For instance, a 7-month-old who is under pediatric care, has received the Haemophilus influenza type b (HIB) vaccine, and presents with a fever while tugging at his ear could be assigned to ESI level 5.

##### Case Examples

The case studies below illustrate how vital signs information is utilized during ESI triage.

A healthy-appearing 28-year-old woman states, “My doctor said I’m approximately 6 weeks pregnant, and I believe I might be having a miscarriage.” She reports, “I began spotting this morning and am now experiencing cramping.” She has no allergies or past medical history and is taking prenatal vitamins. Her vital signs are: temperature 98°F, heart rate 112, respiratory rate 22, and blood pressure 90/60.

This patient qualifies for an upgrade from level 3 to level 2 triage due to her vital signs. Her elevated heart rate and respiratory rate, along with low blood pressure, are worrisome. These symptoms may suggest internal hemorrhage caused by a ruptured ectopic pregnancy.

The mother of a 15-month-old reports that her baby has been experiencing diarrhea since the previous day. She mentions that everyone in the family has recently had the gastrointestinal virus that is circulating. The baby has shown reduced appetite, a mild fever, and several episodes of watery stools. The child is calmly sitting on the mother’s lap. The triage nurse observes indications of dehydration. There is no past medical history, no known drug allergies, and the baby is not on any medications. Vital signs are: temperature 100.4°F, heart rate 142, respiratory rate 48, and blood pressure 76/50.

This patient qualifies for at least ESI level 3. He will need laboratory tests and intravenous fluids as resources. Given his vital signs, the triage nurse may escalate him to ESI level 2. In an infant of this age, both heart rate and respiratory rate exceed the normal limits.

A 57-year-old woman states, “I need to see a doctor about my cough. I can’t seem to get rid of it. I barely slept last night because I was coughing so much, and now I’m extremely tired.” She mentions having a fever of 101° last night and is producing yellow sputum when she coughs. Her medical history includes a hysterectomy three years ago; she is not on any medications but is allergic to Penicillin. Her vital signs are: temperature 101.4°, respiratory rate 28, heart rate 100, and oxygen saturation 90 percent.

At the start of her triage evaluation, this patient appears to possibly have pneumonia. She is likely to require two or more resources, but her low oxygen levels and rapid breathing are worrisome. Based on her vital signs, the triage nurse should upgrade her to an ESI level 2.

A 34-year-old obese woman arrives at triage with complaints of diffuse abdominal pain rated 6 out of 10, ongoing for the past two days. She reports multiple episodes of vomiting and notes that her last bowel movement was three days ago. Her medical history includes back surgery; she is not on any medications and has a peanut allergy. Her vital signs are: temperature 97.8°F, heart rate 104, respiratory rate 16, blood pressure 132/80, and oxygen saturation 99%.

This patient will require at least two resources, such as laboratory tests, intravenous fluids, possibly intravenous medication for nausea, and a CT scan. The triage nurse should assess the patient’s vital signs, paying attention to the heart rate. Although the heart rate is slightly outside the normal range for the patient’s age, this may be attributed to pain or physical activity. Therefore, the appropriate action is to categorize the patient as ESI level 3.

A crying 9-year-old arrives at triage with her mother after slipping on an icy sidewalk and hurting her right forearm. The forearm appears clearly deformed, but circulation, sensation, and movement are intact. According to her mother, the child has no allergies, is not on any medications, and is otherwise healthy. Her vital signs are: blood pressure 100/68, heart rate 124, respiratory rate 32, and oxygen saturation 99 percent.

The child is in pain from her fall and is clearly distressed. She will need at least two resources: an x-ray and an orthopedic consultation, and possibly conscious sedation. Although her heart rate and breathing are increased, the triage nurse can confidently assign her to ESI level 3. The changes in her vital signs are most likely caused by pain and emotional upset.

A 72-year-old woman arrives at the emergency department using nasal cannula oxygen for her advanced COPD. She tells the triage nurse that she has an infected cat bite on her left hand, which appears red, swollen, and tender. She has no other health issues, uses albuterol as needed, and takes a daily aspirin. She has no known drug allergies. Her vital signs are: temperature 99.6°F, heart rate 88, respiratory rate 22, blood pressure 138/80, and oxygen saturation 91%. She reports no difficulty breathing.

This patient needs at least two resources: laboratory tests and intravenous antibiotics. She qualifies for ESI level 3. Although the triage nurse observes that her oxygen saturation and respiratory rate fall outside the normal adult range, the patient has advanced COPD. Therefore, these vital signs are not worrisome, and she will remain at ESI level 3 without being up-triaged.

##### Case Examples

The case studies below illustrate how vital signs information is utilized during ESI triage.

A healthy-appearing 28-year-old woman states, “My doctor said I’m approximately 6 weeks pregnant, and I believe I might be having a miscarriage.” She reports, “I began spotting this morning and am now experiencing cramping.” She has no allergies or past medical history and is taking prenatal vitamins. Her vital signs are: temperature 98°F, heart rate 112, respiratory rate 22, and blood pressure 90/60.

This patient qualifies for an upgrade from level 3 to level 2 due to her vital signs. Her elevated heart rate and respiratory rate, along with low blood pressure, are worrisome. These symptoms may suggest internal bleeding caused by a ruptured ectopic pregnancy.

The mother of a 15-month-old reports that her baby has been experiencing diarrhea since the previous day. She mentions that everyone in the family has recently had the gastrointestinal virus that is circulating. The baby has shown reduced appetite, a mild fever, and several episodes of watery stools. The child is calmly sitting on the mother’s lap. The triage nurse observes indications of dehydration. There is no past medical history, no known drug allergies, and the baby is not on any medications. Vital signs are: temperature 100.4°F, heart rate 142, respiratory rate 48, and blood pressure 76/50.

This patient qualifies for at least ESI level 3. He will need laboratory tests and intravenous fluids as resources. Given his vital signs, the triage nurse may escalate him to ESI level 2. In an infant of this age, both heart rate and respiratory rate exceed the normal limits.

A 57-year-old woman states, “I need to see a doctor about my cough. I just can’t get rid of it. I barely slept last night because I was coughing so much, and now I’m extremely tired.” She mentions having a fever of 101° last night and is producing yellow sputum when she coughs. Her medical history includes a hysterectomy three years ago; she is not on any medications but is allergic to penicillin. Her vital signs are: temperature 101.4°, respiratory rate 28, heart rate 100, and oxygen saturation 90 percent.

At the start of her triage evaluation, this patient appears to possibly have pneumonia. She is likely to require two or more resources, but her low oxygen levels and rapid breathing are worrisome. Based on her vital signs, the triage nurse should upgrade her to an ESI level 2.

A 34-year-old obese woman arrives at triage with complaints of diffuse abdominal pain rated 6 out of 10, ongoing for the past two days. She reports multiple episodes of vomiting and notes that her last bowel movement was three days ago. Her medical history includes back surgery; she is not on any medications and has a peanut allergy. Her vital signs are: temperature 97.8°F, heart rate 104, respiratory rate 16, blood pressure 132/80, and oxygen saturation 99%.

This patient will require at least two resources, such as laboratory tests, intravenous fluids, possibly IV medication for nausea, and a CT scan. The triage nurse should assess the patient’s vital signs, paying attention to the heart rate. Although the heart rate is slightly outside the normal range for the patient’s age, this may be attributed to pain or physical activity. Therefore, the appropriate action is to categorize the patient as ESI level 3.

A crying 9-year-old arrives at triage with her mother after slipping on an icy sidewalk and hurting her right forearm. The forearm appears clearly deformed, but circulation, sensation, and movement are intact. According to her mother, the child has no allergies, is not on any medications, and is otherwise healthy. Her vital signs are: blood pressure 100/68, heart rate 124, respiratory rate 32, and oxygen saturation 99 percent.

The child is in pain from her fall and is clearly distressed. She will need at least two resources: an x-ray and an orthopedic consultation, and possibly conscious sedation. Although her heart rate and breathing are increased, the triage nurse can confidently assign her to ESI level 3. The changes in her vital signs are most likely caused by pain and emotional upset.

A 72-year-old woman arrives at the emergency department using nasal cannula oxygen for her advanced COPD. She tells the triage nurse about an infected cat bite on her left hand, which appears red, swollen, and tender. She has no other health issues, uses albuterol as needed, and takes a daily aspirin. She has no known drug allergies. Her vital signs are: temperature 99.6°F, heart rate 88, respiratory rate 22, blood pressure 138/80, and oxygen saturation 91%. She reports no difficulty breathing.

This patient needs at least two resources: laboratory tests and intravenous antibiotics. She qualifies for ESI level 3. Although the triage nurse observes that her oxygen saturation and respiratory rate are abnormal for a typical adult, the patient has advanced COPD. Therefore, these vital signs are not worrisome in her case, and she will remain at ESI level 3 without being up-triaged.

##### Conclusion

This chapter lays the groundwork for comprehending how vital signs are used within the Emergency Severity Index triage system. It also discusses the unique considerations for patients younger than 36 months. More research is needed to determine the most appropriate vital sign thresholds for emergency department triage. Additional studies will focus on pediatric patients arriving at the emergency department. We anticipate that future updates to the ESI will incorporate new evidence about how well triage vital signs predict outcomes for both pediatric and adult patients.

### Appendix A. Frequently Asked Questions

##### Chapter 3.

###### Frequently Asked Questions

1. Is it necessary to raise an adult patient’s triage level if their heart rate exceeds 100?

No, it is something to take into account.

2. Is it necessary to increase a patient’s triage level if their pain score is 7 out of 10 or higher?

No, this is just one aspect to take into account.

If a patient is chronically confused, does that mean they should always be assigned to ESI level 2?

No, patients who experience a sudden alteration in their level of consciousness are given an ESI level 2.

4. At what times should vital signs be measured?

For any patient classified as ESI level-3, vital signs are always taken if the triage nurse believes they could be helpful.

##### Chapter 4.

###### Frequently Asked Questions

1. Is it necessary to assign an ESI triage level of 2 to a 25-year-old woman who reports her pain as 10 out of 10 but is eating potato chips?

No. Since her vital signs are stable and she doesn’t meet any high-risk criteria, this patient should be categorized as ESI level 3. She will probably require lab tests and at least two resources, such as x-rays, an IV, or pain medication. Therefore, you should not allocate your last available bed to her.

Should an 80-year-old woman with ongoing confusion be assigned an ESI level 2 during triage?

No. The sudden appearance of confusion, lethargy, or disorientation qualifies for ESI level 2.

3. Shouldn’t a patient experiencing active chest pain be assigned an ESI level 1? After all, they ought to receive the highest priority.

Not every patient presenting with chest pain qualifies for ESI level-1. Patients who are unresponsive, without a pulse, not breathing, or in need of immediate life-saving measures fall under level-1. Those with chest pain who appear pale, sweaty, have low blood pressure, or a slow heart rate and need urgent IV access to stabilize their condition are also considered level-1. Patients who are stable but experiencing ongoing chest pain generally meet high-risk criteria and should be assigned ESI level 2, with prompt placement arranged.

##### Chapter 5.

###### Frequently Asked Questions

1. Why isn’t teaching someone how to use crutches considered a resource?

Although teaching patients how to use crutches can take up a significant amount of the emergency department staff’s time, this instruction is frequently given to individuals with uncomplicated ankle sprains. These cases are generally categorized as ESI level 4 (ankle x-ray = one resource). Such patients are clearly less acute and require fewer resources compared to more complicated cases, such as those with tibia or fibula fractures, who are typically ESI level 3 (leg x-rays, orthopedic consultation, casting or splinting, IV pain management = two or more resources). Using a nursing resource intensity measure would more accurately capture the ED staff’s efforts involved in providing crutch-walking instruction.

2. Why doesn’t a splint qualify as a resource?

Using basic, pre-made splints (like those for ankle sprains) does not count as a resource. However, when ED staff create and apply splints, such as thumb spica splints for thumb fractures, this is considered a resource. To distinguish between patients with extremity injuries: those suspected of having fractures should be assigned ESI level 3 (requiring two or more resources, such as x-rays, pain medication, and the creation and application of splints or casts), while patients who likely have simple sprains should be classified as ESI level 4.

3. Why is a saline or heparin lock not considered a resource?

In general, placing a heparin lock does not require much time from the emergency department staff. Nevertheless, most patients who receive heparin locks also need at least two additional resources, such as lab tests or IV medications, which typically results in them being categorized as ESI level 3 regardless.

Are all patients undergoing conscious sedation classified as ESI level 3 or above?

Conscious sedation is regarded as a complex procedure requiring two resources and is typically carried out on patients who are also undergoing laboratory tests, x-rays, or additional interventions like fracture reduction or dilation and curettage.

5. Are eye irrigation, administration of nebulized medications, and blood transfusions classified as resources?

All three are regarded as resources when assigning ESI triage ratings. These resources are typically utilized for patients with more acute conditions, demand considerable time from ED staff, and are likely to result in longer patient stays.

6. Do all patients with asthma fall under ESI level 4 since they will need nebulized treatment?

No. Asthma patients who are stable and only need nebulized medication are classified as ESI level 4. Some, however, experience severe respiratory distress and qualify for ESI level 2. Others fall in between, needing intravenous steroids or an x-ray along with nebulized treatments, and are categorized as ESI level 3. Lastly, those who just need a prescription refill for their inhaler are assigned ESI level 5, as they do not need any resources.

##### Chapter 6.

###### Frequently Asked Questions

Why is it unnecessary to use vital signs when triaging patients classified as ESI level 1 or 2?

Vital signs are not required to classify patients as life-threatening (ESI level 1) or high-risk (ESI level 2). Because patients at ESI levels 1 and 2 are in critical condition, they need an immediate response from the medical team. Multiple actions can take place at the same time, and vital signs may be obtained during the initial evaluation in the main acute section of the emergency department.

2. Why are vital signs not mandatory for patients classified as ESI level-4 and 5?

Vital signs are not required to classify patients as low or no resource (ESI level 4 or 5). Additionally, the pain, anxiety, and discomfort experienced during an emergency department visit can often affect a patient’s vital signs, which may normalize soon after the initial evaluation. However, if there are indications of abnormal symptoms—such as altered skin color, changes in mental status, dizziness, or sweating—a nurse may decide to check vital signs. If there are no physical signs suggesting the need for vital sign assessment, the patient can be directed to the main emergency department or an express care room.

3. What is the reason for taking vital signs on patients classified as ESI level-3?

Vital signs help distinguish between patients who require multiple resources but are stable (ESI level 3) and those who may be unstable or at higher risk (ESI level 2). Sometimes, patients classified as ESI level 3 may actually have unstable vital signs despite appearing stable. For ESI level-3 patients, checking vital signs acts as an important safety measure. Typically, ESI level-3 patients have more complex conditions and many end up being admitted to the hospital. Because they are not suitable for the fast-track area, these patients may need to wait longer for definitive care. They pose a particular challenge during triage, making it essential for caregivers to use vital signs to ensure the correct ESI level is assigned.

4. Why are temperatures always taken for pediatric patients under 36 months of age?

Temperature helps distinguish pediatric patients who require few or no resources (ESI level 4 or 5) from those likely to need multiple resources. In infants younger than 3 months, an abnormal temperature may suggest bacteremia and categorize the child as high-risk.

5. What causes the literature to offer differing perspectives on the importance of vital signs in the triage process?

There is no conclusive evidence regarding the usefulness of vital signs in emergency department triage. Numerous elements can impact the reliability of vital sign measurements, which are somewhat dependent on the person performing the assessment. In certain situations, factors like long-term medication use (such as beta-blockers) can influence vital signs. Additionally, vital signs can serve to meet some public health responsibilities that emergency departments have. Finally, they are also useful for categorizing young pediatric patients into different groups.

6. Does JCAHO mandate that vital signs be taken during triage?

The Joint Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations does not explicitly define a standard for vital signs. However, it does state that physiological parameters should be evaluated based on the patient's condition.

7. Should the vital sign thresholds in the danger zone box be strictly enforced?

In everyday practice, surpassing the danger zone vital sign thresholds leads to up-triage being “considered” instead of being done automatically. The skilled triage nurse must apply sound clinical judgment when assigning the patient’s ESI level. This decision involves evaluating the patient’s vital signs, medical history, medications, and overall clinical presentation. Further research is necessary to establish how well vital signs at triage predict outcomes and to define exact thresholds for up-triage.

8. What should be done if patients classified as ESI level-4 or 5 exhibit danger zone vital signs?

Although taking vital signs is not necessary to assign ESI levels 4 or 5, many patients may still have their vitals checked during triage if that is part of the emergency department’s standard procedures. According to the ESI triage guidelines, the triage nurse does not need to consider vital signs when determining if a patient qualifies for ESI level 5 (no resources needed) or ESI level 4 (one resource needed). Nevertheless, in real-world settings, a careful nurse will use clinical judgment and may factor in vital sign data when assigning the ESI level. For example, if a patient only wants a prescription refill, has no acute symptoms, and presents with a heart rate of 104 after walking to the ED, the nurse may still assign an ESI level 5. Conversely, if the same patient has a heart rate of 148 and it is irregular, the nurse should assign an ESI level 2. The triage nurse must also address situations such as elevated blood pressure in a patient otherwise classified as ESI level 4 or 5. If the patient has no symptoms related to the high blood pressure, the triage level should remain unchanged. Typically, elevated blood pressure in an asymptomatic patient will not be managed in the ED, but it is important to refer the patient to a primary care provider for further evaluation and long-term management.

# Emergency Severity Index, Version 4: Implementation Handbook

### Note from the Director

The Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality is proud to present the Emergency Severity Index, Version 4: Implementation Handbook. This guide details every aspect of the Emergency Severity Index (ESI), a five-level triage system used in emergency departments to categorize patients into five groups—ranging from 1 (most urgent) to 5 (least urgent)—based on the severity of their condition and the resources they require.

Following the creation of the ESI by emergency physicians Richard Wuerz and David Eitel in 1998 and successful pilot testing, the ESI Triage Group was established. Additional development of the ESI was supported by an AHRQ grant. This group, made up of clinicians, managers, educators, and researchers, continued to improve the algorithm into its current form.

Aligned with our mission to enhance the quality, safety, efficiency, and effectiveness of health care for all Americans, AHRQ places a strong focus on training. Together with the included set of two DVDs, this handbook offers essential support to emergency department nurses, physicians, and administrators in establishing a thorough ESI educational program. The resources are based on ESI Version 4, which features updates to the algorithm, particularly expanding the criteria for ESI level 1 and refining the guidelines for pediatric fever.

An effectively executed ESI program enables hospital emergency departments to quickly recognize patients requiring urgent care, more accurately identify those who can be safely and efficiently treated in a fast-track or urgent care setting instead of the main ED, and more precisely establish criteria for diverting ambulance patients away from the ED.

We hope this tool proves helpful as you continue working to enhance the quality of care in your emergency department.

### Chapter 2.Triage Acuity Systems

##### Standardization of Triage Acuity

Despite the fact that U.S. emergency departments (EDs) receive over 110 million visits annually (McCaig & Burt, 2004), there is a lack of comprehensive data on these visits at the local, regional, or national scale. This scarcity of information makes it challenging to address key questions such as “Which EDs treat the most critically ill patients?” and “What impact does patient acuity have on ED overcrowding?” As a result, there is increasing interest in developing standardized ED data systems in the United States to enhance clinical care, facilitate ED monitoring, enable benchmarking, and support research efforts (Barthell, Coonan, Finnell, Pollock, & Cochrane, 2004; Gilboy, Travers & Wuerz, 1999; Handler et al., 2004; National Center for Injury Prevention and Control).

A key data point in the emergency department is triage acuity, described by the Data Elements for Emergency Department Systems Task Force as the categorization of a patient’s condition based on how critical or potentially life- or limb-threatening it is, and whether urgent intervention is required to relieve symptoms (NCIPC, 1997, p. 94).

There is significant inconsistency among emergency department triage acuity systems, especially within the United States (Emergency Nurses Association [ENA], 1997). Different systems use varying terminology for triage categories, and there is no universal consensus on the definitions for each level. Table 2-1 provides examples of acuity rating systems. Due to the absence of standardized triage acuity data in the U.S., it is understandable that the emergency department has been referred to as a “black box” of crucial public health information that remains mostly inaccessible in its current state (Martinez, 1995).

The Emergency Severity Index (ESI) is an innovative tool for assessing triage acuity in emergency departments. Research has demonstrated its consistency across various EDs, including those in both urban and rural areas, as well as in academic and community hospitals (Eitel, Travers, Rosenau, Gilboy & Wuerz, 2003). If adopted broadly in U.S. emergency departments, the ESI could serve as a standard method for triage acuity assessment. This chapter outlines the traditional triage systems used in U.S. EDs and reviews the research related to these systems. It then provides a brief overview of recent triage approaches developed in Australia, Canada, and the United Kingdom. The chapter ends with an examination of studies on the new ESI triage system and explores its potential advantages.

##### Triage Systems in the United States

Although numerous hospitals in the United States continue to utilize three- or four-level triage systems, there is a movement toward adopting five-level systems. The National Center for Health Statistics intends to substitute four-level triage data with five-level data in upcoming national benchmarking surveys of U.S. emergency departments. This change is driven by increasing evidence that five-level triage acuity data are more reliable and valid compared to three-level systems (personal communication, Linda McCaig, National Center for Health Statistics, October 6, 2004).

Both the ENA and the American College of Emergency Physicians (ACEP) have expressed their support for five-level triage systems in U.S. emergency departments. In 2003, a joint task force from ENA and ACEP was formed to review the evidence regarding five-level triage systems, and their work is still in progress. That same year, ACEP and ENA released a joint statement.

ACEP and ENA believe that patient care quality would improve by introducing a standardized triage scale and acuity classification system in emergency departments. Drawing on expert consensus and current evidence, ACEP and ENA endorse the use of a dependable, validated five-level triage scale (ACEP, 2003; ENA, 2003).

A 2005 task force paper recommended both the ESI and the Canadian Triage and Acuity Scale (CTAS) as reliable and valid triage methods (Fernandes et al., 2005). With increasing evidence favoring five-level triage systems, it is probable that a greater number of U.S. hospitals have adopted some version of this approach. The ENA intends to gather information on the types of triage systems used in U.S. hospitals in their next ED survey.

##### Research on Triage Systems in the United States

Research on triage acuity systems is increasing, with studies primarily examining two important aspects of triage nurses’ acuity ratings: reliability and validity (Pedhazur & Schmelkin, 1991; Waltz, Strickland & Lenz, 1991). Reliability refers to the consistency or level of agreement among users of a rating system. In the context of emergency department (ED) triage, two forms of reliability are relevant. Interrater reliability assesses whether two different nurses assign the same triage acuity level to the same patient, while intrarater reliability evaluates if the same nurse gives consistent acuity ratings to the same patient over time. Multiple studies in the United States have found that traditional three-level triage systems often have low interrater and intrarater reliability (Gill, Reese & Diamond, 1996; Travers, Waller, Bowling, Flowers & Tintinalli, 2002; Wuerz, Fernandes & Alarcon, 1998). For example, in one study, 305 triage assessments were analyzed after all triage nurses completed a required refresher course on the hospital’s three-level triage system (Travers et al., 2002). The initial ratings by the triage nurses were compared to retrospective ratings made by an expert panel of ED triage nurses, and the two groups agreed in only about half of the cases.

Validity refers to how accurately the rating system measures what it is supposed to measure. In the context of acuity ratings, validity indicates whether a label such as “nonurgent” truly reflects the absence of urgency in an emergency department patient’s condition. Assessing the validity of triage acuity has been challenging, and research studies have not reported on it.

In contrast to urine culture—which serves as the gold standard for accurately diagnosing urinary tract infections—there is no definitive gold standard for assessing the accuracy of triage acuity ratings in the conventional three-level triage system used in the United States. Nevertheless, surrogate indicators such as admission rates, resource use, and six-month mortality have been employed to evaluate five-level triage systems.

##### Triage Acuity Research on Five- Level Systems Abroad

Highly reliable and well-validated five-level triage systems have become the norm in other countries. Table 2-2 outlines three of these systems.

The Australasian Triage Scale (ATS), created in Australia, has been implemented across Australia and New Zealand since the early 1990s (Australasian College for Emergency Medicine, 1994, 2002; Cameron, Bradt & Ashby, 1996). The Australian Council on Healthcare Standards uses the ATS as the foundation for emergency department (ED) evaluation and quality assurance, with triage classifications undergoing regular assessment. Australian EDs are required to manage patients according to guidelines determined by their triage level. For instance, emergency cases must be attended to within 10 minutes, while nonurgent cases should be seen within 2 hours.

Several studies have assessed the validity and reliability of the ATS. Since there is no definitive gold standard for evaluating triage acuity, researchers have compared the five-level system to other illness severity scales and patient outcomes (Cameron et al., 1996; Cleary, Ashby, Jelinek & Lagaida, 1994; Erwich, Bond, Phillips, & Baggoley, 1997). Triage categories have shown strong correlations with disease- and population-specific measures, such as the Injury Severity Scales, trauma scores, and scales for cardiac, asthma, and pediatric patients. The ATS has also demonstrated a strong relationship with resource use and outcome indicators, including admission rates, emergency department length of stay, and mortality. Additionally, studies in which triage nurses assigned acuity levels to case scenarios have found that the ATS exhibits fair to moderate interrater reliability (Dilley & Standen, 1998; Jelinek & Little, 1996).

Five-level triage systems have been adopted in both the United Kingdom (U.K.) and Canada. In the U.K., the Manchester Triage Scale is utilized.

The system, developed in the U.K., uses a flow-chart presentation style (Manchester Triage Group, 1997). Nurses begin by determining the patient's main complaint, then select one of 52 flow charts to guide a structured interview and assign a triage category ranging from 1 (requiring immediate attention) to 5 (care needed within four hours). The Accident and Emergency Nurses Association has endorsed this system (Zimmermann, 2001). However, research on the Manchester system is limited. In one reliability study, triage decisions made by nurses were retrospectively compared to those of senior medical staff, with only fair to moderate agreement found (Goodacre, Gillett, Harris & Houlihan, 1999).

The Canadian Triage and Acuity Scale (CTAS) was created by a team of Canadian emergency physicians (Beveridge & Ducharme, 1997; Canadian Association for Emergency Physicians [CAEP], 2002). Both the National Emergency Nurses' Affiliation, Inc. (NENA) and the Canadian Association for Emergency Physicians (CAEP) have recognized CTAS as the national benchmark for emergency department triage. Canadian hospitals are mandated to report data, including CTAS scores, for all emergency department visits to the Canadian government. Research has also demonstrated that the Canadian five-level scale provides strong interrater reliability when clinicians assess the severity of written scenarios based on real patient cases.

##### History of the Emergency Severity Index (ESI)

The Emergency Severity Index (ESI) is a five-level triage system created by emergency department physicians Richard Wuerz and David Eitel in the United States (Gilboy et al., 1999; Wuerz, Milne, Eitel, Travers & Gilboy, 2000). The founders believed that a key function of an emergency department triage tool is to help prioritize patients according to the seriousness of their conditions. Triage nurses assess priority by asking, “Who should be seen first?” However, Drs. Wuerz and Eitel recognized that when several high-priority patients arrive at the same time, the question shifts to, “How long can each patient safely wait?” The ESI was designed based on a new approach to ED triage. Beyond determining which patient needs immediate attention, triage nurses using the ESI also evaluate what resources are required to move the patient toward an ED outcome. The ESI maintains the traditional focus on patient urgency, while also aiming to achieve a second objective: not only sorting patients, but also directing them to the appropriate resources, in the right setting, and at the right time.

The initial version (v. 1) of the ESI was first used at two university-affiliated emergency departments in the spring of 1999. By fall 2000, the ESI was updated with input from emergency department clinicians to add triage criteria for pediatric patients, and this second version (v. 2) was then introduced in five more hospitals, including both non-university teaching and community hospitals. Feedback from nurses and physicians at these locations, combined with the best available scientific data, led to further improvements, resulting in version 3 (v. 3) in 2001 (Wuerz et al., 2001). More recent developments have produced additional updates to the tool, which is presented in this edition of the ESI handbook as version 4 (v. 4) (Tanabe et al., in press).

Emergency physicians and nurses in the United States and Canada have carried out multiple research studies evaluating the reliability and validity of the ESI. The ESI has been directly compared with traditional three-level triage systems as well as the five-level CTAS. These studies will be discussed later in the chapter. Similar to the Australasian, Canadian, and U.K. systems, the ESI uses five levels. However, it differs in both its conceptual framework and practical use. The triage systems from Australia, Canada, and the U.K. are based on the idea that triage is meant to determine how long a patient can safely wait for care in the emergency department, with specific definitions for the time to physician assessment included in their protocols. This is a key distinction between ESI and both CTAS and the ATS, as ESI does not specify expected time frames for physician evaluation.

The ESI stands out because it requires the triage nurse to predict the resources a patient will need—such as diagnostic tests and procedures—in addition to assessing acuity, in order to assign a triage category for patients who are less critically ill. Figure 2-1 presents the ESI triage levels. Later chapters will explain in detail how to use the ESI to categorize emergency department patients. In summary, the process begins with evaluating acuity by considering the stability of the patient’s vital signs and the risk of an immediate threat to life or organs. For patients who are stable, the nurse then estimates the resources likely needed to reach a disposition in the emergency department, based on their professional judgment. These resource requirements can vary from none to two or more.

##### Research on the Emergency Severity Index

In a preliminary study evaluating ESI v.1 ratings for 493 triage cases at two Boston hospitals in 1998, researchers determined that the system was both valid and reliable (Wuerz et al., 2000). During the study, patients were triaged at the same time by the triage nurse using the standard three-level scale and by a research nurse applying the first version of the ESI. Afterwards, an investigator, who was unaware of the research nurse’s ESI rating, assigned an ESI level based solely on the written triage note. The assigned triage levels showed a strong correlation with the resources utilized in the emergency department and with outcomes like hospital admission. Patients with higher acuity (ESI levels 1 and 2) required more resources and had a greater likelihood of being admitted compared to those with lower acuity (ESI levels 4 and 5). Agreement between the research nurse and the investigator was high, with 77 percent of cases matching exactly and 22 percent differing by only one triage level.

Several studies have assessed the reliability of the ESI by using the kappa statistic to determine inter-rater agreement, where kappa values range from 0 (no agreement) to 1 (perfect agreement). At one of the original ESI sites, a time series design was employed to compare triage reliability using a three-level scale before and after the introduction of ESI v.1 (Travers et al., 2002). The reliability improved, with the weighted kappa increasing from 0.53 with the three-level system to 0.68 with the five-level ESI. Another study investigated the reliability and validity of ESI v.2 during and after its implementation in triage at seven hospitals in the northeast and southeast. Over 200 triage nurses participated in an ESI triage education program, where they rated 40 case studies using the ESI (Eitel et al., 2003). The findings showed substantial inter-rater reliability, with kappa values between 0.70 and 0.80. Additionally, 386 actual patient triage decisions were analyzed, revealing high inter-rater reliability with weighted kappas from 0.69 to 0.87. In a separate study conducted at an urban emergency department in the Midwest, researchers assessed the reliability of ESI v.3 for 403 real patient triages and found a kappa of 0.89 (Tanabe, Gimbel, Yarnold, Kyriacou & Adams, 2004).

Researchers from Canada and the United States have directly compared the inter-rater reliability of the ESI and CTAS in a randomized study (Worster et al., 2004). The study involved ten Canadian triage nurses who were experienced with CTAS. These nurses were randomly assigned to receive either ESI version 3 or CTAS refresher training, after which they evaluated 200 case studies using the respective triage system. Both groups demonstrated excellent inter-rater reliability, with kappa values of 0.89 for ESI and 0.91 for CTAS.

The effectiveness of the ESI has been assessed by analyzing outcomes in several thousand patients. Research has demonstrated consistent and strong associations between the ESI and factors such as hospitalization, emergency department length of stay, and mortality (Eitel et al., 2003; Tanabe et al., 2004; Wuerz, 2001; Wuerz et al., 2001). Additionally, the ESI has shown moderate correlations with physician evaluation and management codes, as well as nursing workload indicators (Travers et al., 2002). The ESI also enables meaningful comparisons of patient case mix across different hospitals. In one study, a stratified random sample of 200 patients was taken from each of the seven original ESI hospitals to compare case mix (Eitel et al., 2003). As anticipated, tertiary care centers had a greater proportion of high-acuity patients, while community hospitals had more patients requiring fewer resources.

A survey conducted among nursing staff at the two initial university teaching hospitals found that the response to the ESI implementation was favorable (Wuerz et al., 2001). Nurses indicated that the ESI was simpler to use and more effective for prioritizing patients for care compared to the previous three-level systems used at both locations.

In the latest ESI study, the accuracy of ESI level 2 was closely analyzed (Tanabe et al., in press). Reviewing the outcomes of 571 ESI level-2 patients across five hospitals, researchers discovered that 20 percent required immediate, life-saving treatment. The study’s authors suggested that these patients should be categorized as ESI level 1. The revised ESI version 4, discussed in later chapters of this book, incorporates changes informed by this recent research.

##### Benefits of the Emergency Severity Index

The ESI has been adopted by hospitals across various regions, including both university and community hospitals, as well as teaching and nonteaching facilities. Clinicians, managers, and researchers in these settings have recognized several advantages of ESI triage compared to traditional three-level systems. One key advantage is the ability to quickly identify patients who require immediate care. ESI triage emphasizes the efficient sorting of patients, especially when resources are limited. In some ways, ESI triage returns to the original intent of triage, as established during Napoleon’s era. It involves rapidly categorizing patients into five groups based on significant differences in anticipated resource needs, which correspond to different operational requirements. Utilizing ESI for this swift categorization can enhance patient flow through the emergency department. After an ESI triage level is determined, patients can be directed to further assessment, registration, initial treatment, or the waiting area, depending on their severity and expected resource use. For instance, patients classified as level 1 or 2 can be taken straight to the treatment area for prompt evaluation and care, while those at levels 4 and 5 may proceed to registration before waiting for an available bed.

A key concern separate from ESI triage is when to perform a full nursing assessment. Many experts suggest that a comprehensive assessment does not need to be completed at the initial triage station, but can instead take place in the main treatment area or a secondary triage area, depending on each patient’s needs and the current workload in the emergency department (Gilboy et al., 1999). At triage, only the evaluation necessary to assign an ESI level is required to help with the initial sorting of patients. Full clinical assessments are time-consuming, and performing them at triage can delay care and lower satisfaction for patients with less severe conditions. As patient numbers and case complexity rise, leading to ED crowding, it is necessary to rethink traditional care processes to improve efficiency and effectiveness. Nevertheless, it remains essential to gather enough information to accurately determine the appropriate triage category. This is particularly important when patients face long waits to see a physician, which is common with higher patient volumes. Triage has become even more vital as waiting room times increase. Assigning a patient to an inappropriately low triage category can heighten the risk of poor outcomes due to the resulting longer wait.

Additional advantages of the ESI include its ability to identify patients who do not require care in the main emergency department and can instead be safely and more efficiently managed in a fast-track or urgent care setting. For instance, in many hospitals, triage guidelines specify that all ESI level 4 and 5 patients may be directed to either medical urgent care or minor trauma sections of the ED. The policy also permits certain level-3 patients, such as those needing straightforward migraine treatment, to be sent to urgent care. ESI level-3 patients assigned to urgent care, as well as any patients transferred from urgent care to the acute area for more serious issues, are tracked through the quality improvement program. Nurses using the ESI have noted that it improves communication about patient acuity compared to the previous three-level triage systems used at these facilities (Wuerz et al., 2001). For example, a triage nurse can simply state, “I need a bed for a level 2 patient,” and the charge nurse immediately understands the urgency without needing a detailed patient description.

The ESI has also served as the basis for emergency department policies targeting certain groups. For instance, at one location, the psychiatric team is required to provide consultations for level 2 and 3 patients within 30 minutes, and for level 4 and 5 patients within an hour of being notified. At another facility, the ESI is part of a policy for patients over 20 weeks pregnant who come to the ED. Patients assigned ESI levels 1 and 2 receive care in the ED by emergency medicine staff with an obstetric consultation, while those at levels 3, 4, or 5 are directed to the hospital’s labor and delivery unit.

The ESI is also an effective method for establishing thresholds for redirecting ambulance patients away from the ED. At Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston, the ED Diversion Policy and Guidelines define full capacity as all RN-staffed ED beds being occupied. The ESI is utilized to assess when the department is over capacity.

Studies have demonstrated that the ESI is a dependable and accurate method for assessing triage acuity. This system has been implemented in numerous emergency departments across various regions of the United States, including both academic and community hospitals. These institutions have shown that using the ESI enhances emergency department efficiency and patient outcomes. Broader use of the ESI in U.S. hospitals could help create a standardized approach to triage acuity assessment, supporting benchmarking, public health monitoring, and research efforts.

### Chapter 3. Introduction to the Emergency Severity Index

The Emergency Severity Index (ESI) is an easy-to-use, five-level triage tool that classifies emergency department patients by assessing both the severity of their condition and the resources they will require. The triage nurse first evaluates the patient’s acuity. If the patient does not qualify for the highest acuity levels (ESI level 1 or 2), the nurse then considers the anticipated resource needs to assign a triage level (ESI level 3, 4, or 5). Unlike other triage systems, the ESI uniquely incorporates resource requirements into its triage assessment. Acuity is judged based on the stability of vital signs and the risk to life, limb, or organ function. The nurse predicts resource needs by drawing on experience with patients who have had similar symptoms or injuries. Resource needs refer to the number of interventions or services a patient is likely to need before a decision about their care can be made. After becoming familiar with the ESI algorithm, the triage nurse can quickly and accurately assign patients to one of five clearly defined, non-overlapping categories. The ESI offers emergency departments a reliable and valid method for triage (Eitel, Travers, Rosenau, Gilboy & Wuerz, 2003; Travers, Waller, Bowling, Flowers & Tintinalli, 2002; Wuerz, Travers, Gilboy, Eitel, Rosenau & Yazhari, 2001; Tanabe, Gimbel, Yarnold, Kyriacou, & Adams, 2004; Tanabe, Gimbel, Yarnold, & Adams, 2004).

This chapter offers a detailed, step-by-step guide to triaging using the ESI algorithm. Later chapters delve deeper into essential concepts and include various examples to illustrate the nuances of applying ESI.

Algorithms are commonly utilized in emergency care settings. Many emergency healthcare providers are acquainted with the algorithms taught in programs like Basic Life Support, Advanced Cardiac Life Support, and the Trauma Nursing Core Course. These programs offer a systematic, stepwise method for making clinical decisions, which clinicians can master through repeated practice. At each stage, the algorithm guides the user on which questions to pose or what information to collect. Depending on the responses or data gathered, a decision is reached, and the algorithm leads the user to the subsequent step, eventually resulting in an outcome.

Using the ESI algorithm for triage requires an experienced emergency department nurse to begin at the top of the algorithm. Figure 3-1 provides a conceptual summary of the ESI algorithm, highlighting its key decision points. A more detailed explanation of the actual ESI algorithm is given later in this chapter (see Figure 3-1a). The algorithm involves four decision points (A, B, C, and D) to categorize patients into one of five triage levels (refer to Figure 3-1). With experience, the triage nurse will be able to quickly progress through each ESI decision point.

##### Decision Point A: Is the Patient Dying?

In simple terms, at decision point A (Figure 3-2), the triage nurse determines whether the patient is dying. If the response is “yes,” the triage process ends there, and the patient is immediately assigned to ESI level 1. If the answer is “no,” the process continues to the next step in the algorithm, decision point B.

The question below helps assess if the patient is at risk of dying (conceptual algorithm): Does the patient need an urgent life-saving intervention? The subsequent questions assist in evaluating whether the patient fulfills level-1 criteria:

Does the patient need urgent airway management, medication, or another hemodynamic intervention?

Does the patient exhibit any of the following: is already intubated, not breathing, without a pulse, experiencing severe respiratory distress, has an SpO2 below 90 percent, shows sudden changes in mental status, or is unresponsive?

Studies have shown that triage nurses can reliably anticipate when immediate interventions are necessary (Tanabe et al., in press). For ESI triage, Table 3-1 outlines which interventions are classified as life-saving and which are not.

Interventions that are not classified as life-saving may involve diagnostic or therapeutic procedures, but do not directly “save a life.” Life-saving interventions focus on ensuring an open airway, sustaining breathing, or supporting circulation. The following questions may assist in assessing whether a patient needs a life-saving intervention.

Is this patient's airway open and unobstructed?

Is the patient showing signs of breathing?

Is the patient exhibiting a pulse?

Is the nurse worried about the pulse’s rate, rhythm, and strength?

Was this patient intubated before arriving at the hospital due to worries about their capacity to keep their airway open, breathe on their own, or sustain adequate oxygen levels?

Is the nurse worried about whether this patient can supply enough oxygen to their tissues?

An ESI level-1 patient arrives at the emergency department in a critical, unstable state. Immediate intervention is essential to prevent death, prompting a coordinated team response with the physician present at the bedside and nurses delivering intensive care. These patients receive immediate attention, as prompt treatment can significantly impact their risk of complications or death.

A primary distinction between ESI level-1 and level-2 patients is the necessity for immediate physician involvement in patient care. Level-1 patients are in critical condition and need prompt evaluation and intervention by a physician. In contrast, although level-2 patients are also seriously ill, emergency nurses can begin treatment using established protocols without a physician present. The nurse understands that interventions are required but is assured that the patient’s condition is stable enough not to worsen rapidly. The nurse can start intravenous lines, provide supplemental oxygen, perform an ECG, and connect the patient to a cardiac monitor before a physician is required at the bedside.

When assessing the necessity for urgent lifesaving measures, the triage nurse thoroughly examines the patient’s respiratory condition and oxygen saturation (SpO2) levels. Even if a patient is still breathing, severe respiratory distress or an SpO2 below 90 percent signals the need for prompt action to secure the airway and ensure adequate oxygenation. Such a patient will need the physician present to administer medications for rapid sequence intubation or to initiate other airway and breathing interventions.

Patients experiencing chest pain should also be assessed according to the same standards. Some individuals with chest pain are quite stable and may only need a diagnostic ECG, meaning they do not qualify for level-1 criteria. In contrast, those who appear pale, sweaty, in severe respiratory distress, or are hemodynamically unstable will need urgent, life-saving treatment and do fulfill level-1 criteria. Every patient with chest pain must be evaluated against the level-1 criteria to decide if immediate life-saving intervention is necessary.

When deciding if a patient needs immediate life-saving care, the triage nurse must evaluate the patient’s level of consciousness. The ESI algorithm utilizes the AVPU scale (alert, verbal, pain, unresponsive) as shown in Table 3-2. This step aims to identify patients experiencing a sudden change in consciousness. The nurse should look for deviations from the patient’s baseline, with particular concern for those who were previously alert but are now categorized as P (pain) or U (unresponsive). Unresponsiveness should be considered in the context of sudden neurological changes, and not in patients with pre-existing developmental delays, documented dementia, or aphasia. Any patient who is unresponsive—including those who are intoxicated and do not respond to painful stimuli—meets level-1 criteria and requires immediate assessment. For instance, a patient with a sudden decrease in mental status who cannot maintain their airway or is experiencing severe respiratory distress would need urgent intervention.

Users familiar with ESI version 3 (v. 3) will observe a significant modification in the ESI level-1 criteria. The primary distinction between ESI v. 3 and ESI version 4 (v. 4) is the recognition and reclassification of some of the most critically ill patients, who were previously categorized as ESI level 2. Now, patients who need immediate life-saving interventions are assigned to ESI level 1. Under the earlier version, a patient experiencing severe respiratory distress who needed intubation but was still breathing would have been placed in ESI level 2. In the new version, this patient now qualifies for level 1. Additional examples of patients now considered ESI level 1 include those who are weak and dizzy with a heart rate of 30 or 200. While this adjustment may not impact a large number of patients, it ensures that the most critically ill are classified correctly. Before v. 4, triage nurses often faced two types of ESI level-2 patients: those needing immediate attention and those who could safely wait a short period (about 10 minutes) without worsening. This issue prompted a large, multi-center, prospective study to determine which ESI level-2 patients actually received immediate interventions (Tanabe et al., in press). Findings from that study led to the revision of the ESI system. This updated ESI handbook outlines these changes and introduces ESI v. 4.

An ESI level-1 patient does not necessarily arrive at the emergency department by ambulance. Individuals with drug overdoses or acute alcohol intoxication might be left at the entrance, while children could be brought in by car and carried inside. An experienced triage nurse can quickly recognize these critically ill patients. With a swift, visual assessment from a distance, the nurse identifies those in severe distress. These patients are promptly moved to the treatment area, where resuscitation begins immediately.

Patients classified as ESI level 1 make up about 1 to 3 percent of all emergency department cases (Eitel et al., 2003; Wuerz, Milne, Eitel, Travers & Gilboy, 2000; Wuerz et al., 2001). These patients require immediate resuscitation by either the emergency physician and nurse or the trauma or code team upon arrival. Research on ESI indicates that the majority of ESI level-1 patients are admitted to intensive care units, while some die in the emergency department (Eitel et al., 2003; Wuerz, 2001). A small number of ESI level-1 patients are discharged from the ED if their altered level of consciousness or vital functions are reversible, as seen in cases of hypoglycemia, seizures, alcohol intoxication, or anaphylaxis.

Illustrations of ESI level 1:

Heart stoppage.

Cessation of breathing.

Acute difficulty breathing.

Oxygen saturation below 90%.

Severely injured trauma patient arriving in an unresponsive state.

Overdose presenting with a respiratory rate of 6.

Three general questions are utilized to assess if the patient satisfies level-2 criteria.

Is this considered a high-risk scenario?

2. Does the patient exhibit confusion, lethargy, or disorientation?

3. Is the patient experiencing significant pain or discomfort?

The triage nurse gathers relevant subjective and objective data to promptly address these questions. An overview of ESI level-2 criteria is provided here, with a more comprehensive discussion of patients qualifying for ESI level-2 to be covered in Chapter 4.

Severe difficulty breathing accompanied by agonal or gasping breaths.

Markedly slow or fast heart rate accompanied by evidence of inadequate tissue perfusion.

Low blood pressure accompanied by symptoms of inadequate tissue perfusion.

A trauma patient in need of urgent resuscitation with crystalloids and colloids.

Experiencing chest pain, appearing pale and sweaty, with a blood pressure of 70 by palpation.

Feeling weak and lightheaded, heart rate is 30.

Severe allergic response.

Infant exhibiting limpness.

Unconscious with a strong smell of alcohol.

Low blood sugar accompanied by altered mental state.

##### Decision Point B: Should the Patient Wait?

After the triage nurse establishes that the patient does not qualify for ESI level 1, the nurse proceeds to decision point B (refer to Figure 33). At this stage, the nurse must determine if the patient can safely wait to be evaluated. If waiting is not appropriate, the patient is assigned ESI level 2. If the patient is able to wait, the process continues to the following step in the algorithm.

###### Is This a High-risk Situation?

Drawing on a brief patient interview, general observations, and the intuition developed through experience, the triage nurse identifies patients at high risk. Often, factors such as the patient’s age and medical history play a role in the nurse’s assessment of risk. A high-risk patient is someone whose condition could quickly worsen or who shows symptoms that may indicate a need for urgent, time-sensitive intervention. This type of patient faces a potential major threat to life or organ function. In most cases, a comprehensive physical exam or a complete set of vital signs is not necessary to recognize high risk. The patient may describe symptoms that an experienced triage nurse immediately recognizes as dangerous. For instance, a patient who says, “I never get headaches, but after lifting something heavy, I now have the worst headache of my life,” would be triaged as ESI level 2, as these symptoms could indicate a subarachnoid hemorrhage.

If a patient is classified as ESI level 2, the triage nurse has determined that it is not safe for them to wait in the waiting area for any period of time. Although ESI guidelines do not specify exact time frames, patients at ESI level 2 are a high priority and should typically be placed and begin receiving treatment within 10 minutes of their arrival. It is crucial to note that even though the criteria for level 1 have broadened in version 4 of the algorithm, ESI level-2 patients are still regarded as very ill and at significant risk. Immediate care is necessary, and a suitable bed must be located right away. In most cases, instead of proceeding to the next patient, the triage nurse recognizes the severity of the situation and promptly notifies the charge nurse or staff in the patient care area that there is an ESI level-2 patient.

Instances of high-risk scenarios:

Experiencing ongoing chest pain suggestive of coronary syndrome, but currently stable and not in need of urgent life-saving treatment.

A healthcare worker experiencing a needlestick injury.

Shows symptoms of a stroke, but does not fulfill level-1 requirements.

Ectopic pregnancy has been ruled out; the patient is hemodynamically stable.

A patient undergoing chemotherapy, and thus immunosuppressed, presenting with a fever.

A patient exhibiting suicidal or homicidal tendencies.

Chapter 4 provides further details about high-risk situations.

###### Is the Patient Confused, Lethargic, or Disoriented?

This is the second question to consider at decision point B. Once more, the focus is on determining if the patient is exhibiting a sudden change in consciousness. Patients who are normally confused do not qualify for level-2 criteria.

Confused: Shows unsuitable reactions to stimuli, with reduced attention span and impaired memory.

Lethargic: Sleepy, experiencing increased sleep, but reacts suitably when prompted.

Disoriented: The patient cannot accurately respond to questions regarding time, location, or identity.

Instances of patients exhibiting confusion, lethargy, or disorientation:

Recent development of confusion in an older adult.

A 3-month-old infant whose mother reports that the baby is constantly sleeping.

The teenager was discovered in a state of confusion and disorientation.

All of these examples suggest that the brain could be impaired either structurally or chemically.

###### Is This Patient in Severe Pain or Distress?

At decision point B, the triage nurse’s third question is whether the patient is experiencing pain or distress. If the answer is “no,” the nurse proceeds to the next step in the process. If the answer is “yes,” the nurse must evaluate the severity of the pain or distress. This assessment is based on clinical observation and/or the patient’s self-reported pain score of 7 or above on a 0 to 10 scale. When a patient reports pain at 7/10 or higher, the nurse may assign an ESI level 2, but this is not mandatory. Pain is a frequent reason for emergency department visits, and not all patients with pain scores of 7/10 or more require an ESI level-2 designation. For instance, a patient with a sprained ankle and pain rated at 8/10 would typically be classified as ESI level 4. Assigning a level 2 rating based solely on pain is not necessary in such cases.

In certain patients, pain can be evaluated through clinical observation, such as noting distressed facial expressions, sweating, body positioning, and alterations in vital signs. The triage nurse looks for physical signs of acute pain that validate the patient’s reported pain level. For instance, a patient experiencing abdominal pain who is sweating, has a rapid heart rate, and elevated blood pressure, or a patient with intense flank pain, vomiting, pale complexion, and a history of kidney stones, are both clear examples of individuals who qualify for ESI level-2. More details about ESI level 2 and pain assessment can be found in Chapter 4.

Severe distress may be either physical or mental. Instances of distress include a victim of sexual assault, an aggressive patient, or a person with bipolar disorder experiencing a manic episode.

ESI level-2 patients represent a relatively small but high-risk segment, making up 20 to 30 percent of emergency department visits (Travers et al., 2002; Wuerz et al., 2001; Tanabe, Gimbel et al., 2004). After identifying an ESI level-2 patient, the triage nurse must ensure prompt care. Registration can be handled by a family member or completed at the bedside. These patients require vital signs and a thorough nursing assessment, though this does not have to occur during triage. Patient placement should not be postponed to complete vital sign collection. Studies on ESI indicate that 50 to 60 percent of ESI level-2 patients are admitted from the emergency department (Wuerz et al., 2001).

##### Decision Point C: Resource Needs

If the responses to the first two decision points are “no,” the triage nurse proceeds to decision point C (refer to Figure 3-4). At this stage, the nurse should ask, “How many different resources will this patient likely require for the physician to make a disposition decision?” The possible dispositions include discharging the patient home, admitting them to the observation unit or hospital, or transferring them to another facility. This step again relies on the triage nurse’s previous experience with similar emergency department cases. It is important for ED nurses to recognize that estimating resource needs is based on standards of care and is not influenced by the hospital’s type (teaching or non-teaching) or its location. Any patient arriving at an emergency department should generally require the same resources to reach a disposition. Taking into account the patient’s brief subjective and objective evaluation, medical history, allergies, medications, age, and gender, the nurse must determine how many different resources will be used for the physician to decide on a disposition. Essentially, what is the usual protocol for a patient presenting to the ED with this common complaint? The triage nurse should make this judgment based on their assessment of the patient, focusing on standard practices in the specific ED rather than individual provider preferences.

To determine what resources are needed, the triage nurse should understand the standards of care in the emergency department. The nurse must also be aware of the idea of “prudent and customary.” An effective way to approach this is to consider, “Based on this patient’s main complaint or injury, what resources will the emergency physician probably use?” Resources may include hospital services, diagnostic tests, procedures, consultations, or interventions that go beyond the physician’s history and physical exam, as well as basic emergency department actions like applying a bandage. Additional details and examples can be found in Chapter 5.

Table 3-3 outlines what qualifies and does not qualify as a resource for ESI triage classification. Patients at ESI level 3 are expected to need two or more resources, those at ESI level 4 are anticipated to need one resource, and ESI level 5 patients are expected to need no resources, as shown in Table 3-4.

Studies indicate that ESI level-3 patients account for 30% to 40% of those treated in the emergency department (Eitel et al., 2003; Wuerz et al., 2001). These individuals typically need more comprehensive assessments but are considered stable in the short term, which can result in longer ED stays. ESI level 4 and 5 patients represent 20% to 35% of emergency department visits, and this percentage may be higher in areas with limited access to primary care. Properly trained mid-level providers with suitable skill sets could manage these patients in fast-track or express care units, as a significant number present with trauma-related issues. Given their stable condition, these patients can safely wait several hours before being seen.

##### Decision Point D:The Patient's Vital Signs

Prior to assigning a patient to ESI level 3, the nurse must review the patient’s vital signs to determine if they fall outside the normal range for the patient’s age and if these abnormalities are clinically significant. If the vital signs are abnormal, the triage nurse should consider elevating the triage level to ESI level 2. Ultimately, it is up to the triage nurse to decide whether the patient should be upgraded to ESI level 2 due to abnormal vital signs. This is referred to as decision point D.

Vital sign parameters vary by age (refer to Figure 3-5). The vital signs considered include pulse, respiratory rate, and oxygen saturation, with body temperature also assessed in children under three years old. Based on these criteria, a triage nurse may decide to upgrade an adult patient with a heart rate of 104, or keep them at ESI level 3. Similarly, a 6-month-old infant with a cold and a respiratory rate of 48 might be assigned to ESI level 2 or 3. The nurse must determine, using the patient’s history and physical exam, whether the vital signs indicate a high enough risk that the patient should not wait to be evaluated. Chapter 6 provides a detailed discussion of vital signs and includes examples.

Temperature is considered only for children younger than three years old. A high fever may prevent young children from being placed in categories 4 and 5. This approach helps to identify children who may have bacteremia and ensures they are not directed to a fast track area or made to wait for an extended period. Detailed pediatric fever guidelines will be provided in Chapter 6.

###### Does Time to Treatment Influence ESI Triage Categories?

Estimating how long a patient can wait before being seen by a doctor is a key part of most triage systems. The Australasian and Canadian Triage Systems specify that patients must be evaluated by a physician within a set timeframe according to their triage level. In contrast, the ESI does not set exact time requirements for physician assessment. Nonetheless, patients classified as ESI level 2 should receive prompt attention, though the specific timing is determined by each institution’s policy. There is often confusion between institutional policies, the actual process of patient care, and the ESI triage level.

We will present four patient cases where there may appear to be a contradiction between patient flow and triage category. Trauma patients often arrive at triage after experiencing a significant injury mechanism, such as being an unrestrained passenger in a high-speed car accident. Sometimes, these patients do not arrive by ambulance but instead come to triage on their own, reporting localized right upper quadrant pain and having stable vital signs. Although this patient is physiologically stable, walked into the emergency department, and does not meet the criteria for ESI level 1, they are still at high risk for injuries like a liver laceration and other serious trauma, so they should be assigned ESI level 2. Many emergency departments have trauma protocols and trauma response levels that require prompt initiation of care. Both triage level and trauma response level are important and should be documented as separate scores. While the triage nurse correctly identifies this as a physiologically stable trauma patient and assigns ESI level 2, she should also ensure the patient is placed and managed according to trauma policy. The patient is likely stable for at least another 10 minutes and does not need immediate life-saving measures. However, if the same patient arrived with a palpable blood pressure of 80, they would be classified as ESI level 1 and would need urgent, life-saving hemodynamic interventions.

Another instance of policies influencing triage levels involves patients presenting with stable chest pain. If a patient is physiologically stable but has chest pain that could indicate an acute coronary syndrome, they qualify for ESI level-2. These patients do not need immediate life-saving measures but are considered high-risk and require prompt attention. An ECG should be completed within 10 minutes of arrival, and many emergency departments have protocols to ensure rapid ECG initiation. Although care for these patients should begin quickly, the ECG itself is a diagnostic tool, not a life-saving intervention. If all patients with chest pain were assigned ESI level-1, it would hinder the ability to prioritize those who truly need immediate life-saving care. However, a chest pain patient who arrives at triage sweating and with a palpable blood pressure of 80 would meet ESI level-1 criteria.

A third instance of time-critical care involves patients showing symptoms of an acute stroke. If the patient is physiologically stable, a delay of 10 minutes before starting treatment is unlikely to worsen their condition. On the other hand, a stroke patient who cannot maintain their airway qualifies for ESI level 1.

In another scenario, an elderly patient who has fallen and may have a hip fracture arrives with family by private car and is experiencing significant pain. Although the patient does not strictly qualify for ESI level 2, they are clearly uncomfortable. The triage nurse would assign an ESI level 3 and likely prioritize placing the patient in a bed ahead of other ESI level 3 patients. Similar situations can occur with patients arriving by ambulance. However, arriving by ambulance alone does not justify assigning ESI level 1 or 2. Triage level should always be determined using ESI criteria, regardless of how the patient arrived.

Overall, care for ESI level-2 patients should be expedited, with the goal of placing them in the treatment area within 10 minutes. It is crucial to note that although ESI version 4 has broadened level-1 criteria to include patients needing immediate interventions who were previously classified as level 2, all level-2 patients remain potentially very ill and need prompt assessment and care. The triage nurse has determined that it is unsafe for these patients to wait. While they may appear stable at present, their condition could quickly worsen, and timely diagnostic or therapeutic interventions may be critical (for example, stable chest pain requires an ECG within 10 minutes of arrival), or they may face a possible major threat to life or organ function. ESI level-2 patients are still regarded as being at very high risk.

Given the current issue of ED overcrowding, it is common for triage nurses to encounter multiple ESI level-2 patients when there are no available ED beds. In these circumstances, there may be a temptation to “undertriage,” which can result in significant negative outcomes for patients and inaccurately reflect the ED’s case mix. When several ESI level-2 patients present at the same time, the triage nurse should assess each one using the ESI algorithm. This allows the nurse to prioritize among the level-2 patients, identifying those at greatest risk to guide decisions about patient placement.

##### Summary

In conclusion, the ESI is a straightforward five-level triage system that categorizes patients according to the severity of their condition and the resources they require. The ESI triage process relies on four main decision points. With this system, an experienced emergency department nurse can quickly and accurately assess and prioritize patients.

### Chapter 4. ESI Level 2

This chapter builds upon the initial overview of the ESI, emphasizing the importance of the experienced ED nurse’s clinical judgment. The ESI triage training program should allocate significant time to clarifying which patients qualify for ESI level 2. Here, we focus on typical patient scenarios that fulfill the criteria for ESI level 2.

Once the triage nurse has established that the patient does not need urgent, life-saving care, the next step is to assess whether the patient can wait. In making this judgment, the triage nurse should ask, “Would I allocate my last available bed to this patient?” The three questions outlined in Figure 4-1 must be addressed, as they are essential elements of the ESI level-2 criteria.

Is this considered a high-risk scenario?

2. Is the patient showing signs of newly developed confusion, drowsiness, or disorientation?

3. Is the patient in significant pain or discomfort?

The rest of this chapter explores the decision-making aspects of ESI level 2 in depth. Numerous examples are included, illustrating potential medical diagnoses linked to patients’ chief complaints and symptoms. An experienced triage nurse will always evaluate the chief complaint, observed signs and symptoms, patient demographics, and medical history to help identify high-risk situations. Although the goal of nurse triage is not to establish a medical diagnosis, these scenarios rely on the triage nurse’s expertise regarding possible diagnoses related to specific complaints. Comprehensive resources on the signs and symptoms of various medical conditions include the Emergency Nursing Core Curriculum[©] and other emergency nursing reference books. The following section highlights selected examples of high-risk situations, though it is not meant to be all-inclusive. These examples are summarized in Table 4-1.

##### High-risk Situations

Recognizing high-risk situations is essential in the triage decision-making process, no matter which triage system is applied. The ESI emphasizes the significance of identifying high-risk cases and relies on the triage nurse’s knowledge and experience to determine which patients are at increased risk.

There is limited literature on how emergency department (ED) triage nurses make decisions. While knowledge and experience are essential, they are not enough on their own. Another crucial element is intuition or a “sixth sense.” Novice triage nurses should be taught practical guidelines, or rules of thumb, to rely on until they gain the confidence and experience needed for quick, accurate decision-making. Examples of such guidelines include “assume all women of childbearing age are pregnant until proven otherwise” or “consider all chest pain as cardiac in origin until proven otherwise.” New triage nurses are also instructed in recognizing symptom clusters, such as the cardiac cluster of chest pain, nausea, shortness of breath, and sweating. Through previous clinical experiences, ED nurses develop what are known as clinical portraits—memories of specific patient cases they have encountered. For instance, a nurse will always recall a patient with fever, stiff neck, and a meningococcal rash when seeing a similar case in the future. With each triage situation, nurses must draw upon all their accumulated knowledge and experience. Experienced triage nurses should be able to easily recognize high-risk situations.

Vital signs alone are often insufficient for identifying patients at high risk. Patients usually arrive at the emergency department with a main complaint, symptoms, or a history that points to a potentially serious issue that can quickly worsen if not addressed immediately. Factors such as the patient’s age, medical history, and current medications often affect how severe the main complaint appears. For instance, an elderly, frail patient with intense abdominal pain faces a much greater risk of complications or death compared to a healthy 20-year-old. The older patient with abdominal pain should be assigned an ESI level 2, while the younger adult with stable vital signs is generally categorized as ESI level 3. Triage nurses frequently recognize high-risk cases, which may then be supported by abnormal vital signs. For example, a patient reporting fever and a productive cough might have a respiratory rate of 32 and an oxygen saturation of 90 percent. An experienced triage nurse can use their knowledge to determine that this patient likely has pneumonia, is at risk for further oxygen desaturation, and is therefore high risk. In contrast, less experienced emergency department nurses may lack the necessary skills to reliably identify high-risk situations and make correct triage decisions. As a result, an inexperienced triage nurse can be a liability during triage, regardless of the triage system in place. They have not yet developed the ability to use symptom patterns, clinical scenarios, or intuition—methods that are essential for recognizing high-risk patients. The following section will outline specific examples of high-risk situations.

###### Abdominal and Gastrointestinal

Abdominal pain is a common reason for visits to the emergency department. What factors make it high risk? Taking a thorough history and evaluating the current pain level, respiratory rate, and heart rate are key components that help identify high-risk cases. Pain severity is just one aspect to consider. If severe abdominal pain is accompanied by tachycardia or respiratory distress, this may indicate shock and puts the patient at higher risk. Elderly patients with severe abdominal pain are also at increased risk, as they are more likely to suffer from bowel obstructions, gastrointestinal bleeding, and other abdominal issues that carry greater morbidity and mortality compared to younger individuals. It is crucial to look for signs and symptoms of an acute abdomen in all patients presenting with abdominal pain. Important questions include: How long has the pain been present? What prompted the patient to seek emergency care today? Has the patient experienced severe nausea, vomiting, or diarrhea? Is there evidence of dehydration? Patients who report severe, “tearing” abdominal pain that radiates to the back should be evaluated for a possible abdominal aortic aneurysm. This pain is typically described as intense, constant, and of sudden onset, and these patients may have a history of hypertension.

Patients presenting with abdominal pain are frequently assigned an ESI level 3 at the start of the triage assessment, but if tachycardia or additional risk factors are identified, the triage nurse may reassess and classify the patient as high risk.

Vomiting blood or presenting with blood per rectum must be taken seriously and assessed alongside the patient’s vital signs. A 30-year-old with bright red rectal bleeding, stable vital signs, and no additional risk factors does not qualify for ESI level 2. However, an older adult who called emergency services due to vomiting blood and has a heart rate of 117 and a respiratory rate of 24 is considered high risk and does meet the criteria for ESI level 2.

###### Cardiovascular

Chest pain is a frequent reason for seeking medical care. The symptoms of acute coronary syndromes (ACS) can be vague, making it challenging to assess ACS risk during triage. Patients experiencing chest or epigastric discomfort, whether or not they have additional symptoms, generally require a prompt ECG to check for ACS and should be considered high risk—classified as ESI level 2. Triage nurses must be aware of how heart disease can present differently, especially in women. For instance, a 54-year-old obese woman arriving at the emergency department with epigastric pain and fatigue is at risk for ACS and should be assigned to ESI level 2 as high risk. Patients with chest pain who are unstable and need immediate interventions like intubation or hemodynamic support should be categorized as ESI level 1. Not all patients with chest pain fall into level 1 or 2. For example, a healthy 20-year-old with chest pain, cough, and a fever of 101°F is at low risk for ACS and does not meet ESI level 1 or 2 criteria. Each case must be evaluated individually. Other high-risk cardiovascular conditions include possible hypertensive emergencies, acute arterial occlusions, and patients presenting with fever after valve replacement surgery.

###### Dental, Ear, Nose, and Throat

While less frequent, epiglottitis still occurs and poses a potential threat to the airway. Peritonsillar abscess is another condition that can compromise the airway, and both are considered high-risk situations. If a patient with either condition is at immediate risk of airway obstruction and needs urgent intervention, they meet level-1 criteria. For patients presenting with epistaxis, the triage nurse should check blood pressure, even though this step is not included in the ESI algorithm. Causes of epistaxis may include a posterior nosebleed from a hypertensive crisis, nose picking in a patient taking Coumadin®, or recent cocaine use. Regardless of the cause, these patients should be assigned ESI level 2, as they are considered high-risk.

###### Environmental

Individuals with inhalation injuries are at elevated risk for airway obstruction. If a patient exhibits marked airway distress necessitating urgent intervention, they fulfill level-1 criteria.

###### Facial

Individuals who have sustained facial trauma need to be assessed for potential facial fractures. Such fractures frequently occur alongside other serious injuries and can result in airway obstruction, making them high-risk cases that require urgent attention. If facial trauma has already caused airway compromise, the patient should be assigned an ESI level 1 to ensure immediate airway intervention. Cases with a significant risk of airway compromise should be classified as ESI level 2.

###### General Medical

A number of other general medical issues should be evaluated for potential high-risk scenarios. These complications include diabetic ketoacidosis, abnormal blood sugar levels (either high or low), sepsis, episodes of fainting or near-fainting, and various electrolyte imbalances that may require urgent intervention. Hyperkalemia, in particular, poses a significant risk as it can cause dangerous heart rhythm disturbances. This condition should be considered in dialysis patients who present with weakness. Additionally, cancer patients receiving chemotherapy who develop a fever are at increased risk for sepsis and must be promptly recognized as high risk and assessed without delay.

###### Genitourinary

Men experiencing testicular torsion typically report intense pain, are readily identifiable, and need prompt assessment, surgical intervention, and immediate pain management. Another high-risk genitourinary emergency involves renal dialysis patients who are unable to finish their dialysis sessions, as they may have multiple electrolyte imbalances. Both women and men, though more frequently men, may arrive at triage with sudden urinary retention. Men over 65 often present with benign prostatic hypertrophy leading to an inability to urinate. Both genders may also be unable to void following surgery. These individuals are in significant distress and require urgent urinary catheterization. Such cases represent patients in severe distress who should be assigned an ESI level 2.

###### Mental Health

Patients presenting with mental health issues are considered high risk if they pose a threat to themselves, others, or their surroundings. Individuals who are suicidal, homicidal, psychotic, violent, or at risk of fleeing should be classified as high risk. Intoxication alone, without evidence of trauma or risk of aspiration, does not qualify as high risk. However, intoxicated patients should be thoroughly evaluated for trauma or behavioral problems linked to alcohol use or their medical history. If either is present, the situation may be high risk, and the patient should be assigned an ESI level 2.

###### Neurological

Patients experiencing severe headaches along with changes in mental status, elevated blood pressure, lethargy, fever, or a rash should be classified as high risk. Additionally, any individual who suddenly develops speech difficulties or motor weakness should be assigned an ESI level 2. These symptoms may indicate an acute stroke, making prompt assessment essential. The time since symptom onset is a key consideration when determining treatment options, especially for fibrinolytic or other interventions. A patient without a prior history of headaches who arrives at the emergency department with a sudden headache should be considered at high risk for a subarachnoid hemorrhage. Such patients often recall exactly what they were doing when the headache started, which is frequently after activities like lifting, having a bowel movement, or sexual activity.

###### Obstetrical and Gynecological

Women presenting with abdominal pain or vaginal bleeding should be thoroughly evaluated, and vital signs should be checked unless there is an immediate life-threatening condition. For all women of reproductive age, it is essential to obtain a pregnancy history and determine the date of the last menstrual period. The triage nurse should look for symptoms of abruptio placentae and placenta previa in women who are in late pregnancy. In early pregnancy, assessment should focus on identifying signs of ectopic pregnancy and spontaneous abortion. Pregnant patients who are between 14 and 20 weeks gestation or further along should be promptly evaluated by a physician, following the specific guidelines of the institution. Postpartum women who report heavy vaginal bleeding should also receive urgent medical attention from a physician. Any woman, whether pregnant or postpartum, who exhibits significant hemodynamic instability and requires immediate life-saving measures should be classified as ESI level 1 during triage.

###### Ocular

Individuals who experience eye trauma, sudden partial or complete vision loss, or chemical exposure to the eye are at significant risk for lasting eye damage and should be assigned an ESI level 2 triage. Visual loss can be caused by conditions such as central retinal artery occlusion, acute narrow-angle glaucoma, and retinal detachment. Eye injuries may lead to globe rupture or hyphema. Chemical exposures, especially from alkali substances, require prompt irrigation to minimize corneal injury. Each of these situations demands urgent assessment and intervention to avoid further harm or worsening of the condition. These cases fulfill the requirements for ESI level 2. Although immediate eye irrigation is critical, it is not classified as a life-saving measure, so these patients do not qualify for ESI level 1.

###### Orthopedic

Patients exhibiting signs and symptoms of compartment syndrome face a significant risk of losing the affected limb and should be categorized as ESI level 2. Other orthopedic injuries considered high-risk include any limb injury with impaired neurovascular status, partial or complete amputations, or injuries resulting from mechanisms known to be high-risk, such as severe acceleration or deceleration. Patients suspected of having fractures of the pelvis, femur, or hip, as well as those with other limb dislocations, require thorough assessment and monitoring of vital signs. These types of fractures may lead to substantial blood loss. If a patient is hemodynamically unstable and requires immediate life-saving intervention, they should be classified as ESI level 1.

###### Pediatrics

Triage nurses often feel uneasy when determining the acuity level for pediatric patients, particularly infants. Gathering a precise history from the caregiver and assessing the child’s activity are crucial steps. A child who cannot be comforted or who appears withdrawn may be at significant risk for severe illness. The situations below illustrate examples of high-risk conditions in children:

Convulsions.

Severe dehydration and sepsis.

A complication of diabetes characterized by high blood sugar, the presence of ketones, and acidosis.

Burns resulting from child abuse.

Injury to the head.

Overdoses or ingestion of vitamins, iron, or other substances.

An infant younger than 28 days old who has a temperature of 100.4° F (38° C) or higher.

###### Transplant

Patients who have undergone organ transplantation are typically unwell and classified as high risk. They may develop organ rejection, sepsis, or other complications. Individuals awaiting transplantation are also generally regarded as high risk.

###### Respiratory

Numerous respiratory issues can put patients at significant risk. Those experiencing mild to moderate distress should undergo further assessment of their respiratory rate and pulse oximetry to decide if they should be classified as ESI level 2. Patients exhibiting severe respiratory distress who need immediate lifesaving measures, such as intubation, qualify for level-1 categorization. A high-risk patient is someone who is currently breathing and oxygenating sufficiently but is in respiratory distress and could quickly worsen. Causes of respiratory distress may include asthma, pulmonary embolism, pleural effusion, pneumothorax, foreign body aspiration, toxic smoke inhalation, or shortness of breath accompanied by chest pain.

###### Toxicological

The majority of patients presenting with an overdose require prompt assessment, as these cases are considered high risk. Identifying the specific substances ingested and their amounts is frequently challenging. If the overdose was intentional and the patient expresses suicidal thoughts, this also qualifies as a high-risk scenario. Patients who arrive without breathing or need urgent lifesaving measures should be assigned ESI level 1, while all other admitted overdose cases should be classified as ESI level 2.

###### Trauma

Patients who have experienced a traumatic event are often at significant risk for injury, even if no visible injuries are present. Any injury mechanism that carries a high risk should be classified as ESI level 2, unless the patient has unstable vital signs and needs immediate intervention, in which case they should be assigned ESI level 1. Serious injuries occur due to the transfer of mechanical or kinetic energy, typically from acceleration, deceleration, or both. Examples include motor vehicle and motorcycle accidents, falls, and gunshot or stab wounds, all of which involve blunt or penetrating trauma and require thorough assessment for possible severe injury. The triage nurse should gather information such as the patient’s age, any pre-existing medical conditions, environmental factors, the height of a fall or jump, the speed of the vehicle involved, any history of loss of consciousness, the site of a penetrating injury, and the type of weapon used. The nurse will use their understanding of biomechanics and injury mechanisms to evaluate the patient and determine if they meet ESI level 2 criteria. Gunshot wounds to the head, neck, chest, or groin generally necessitate trauma team involvement and immediate care, and should be triaged as ESI level 1.

###### Wound Management

What factors classify a wound as high risk? Is there ongoing, uncontrolled bleeding? Is there evidence of arterial bleeding? Does the injury involve a partial amputation? How did the wound occur, and does the cause put the patient at increased risk for additional traumatic complications? The majority of wounds do not qualify for ESI level 2. For example, a patient with a stab wound to the thigh that only affects the subcutaneous tissue, has controlled bleeding, and maintains good distal neurological status can be assigned to ESI level 4. However, any wound with uncontrolled bleeding that demands immediate, lifesaving intervention to stabilize the patient falls under level 1 criteria.

##### Confusion/Lethargy/ Disorientation

The second consideration when assessing if a patient qualifies for level-2 criteria is whether they are experiencing new confusion, lethargy, or disorientation. Changes in mental status are a common reason for seeking care. Patients with these symptoms are often brought to the emergency department by relatives, friends, or emergency personnel. At decision point B in the ESI algorithm, confusion, lethargy, or disorientation refers specifically to a recent or sudden change in consciousness. Ongoing dementia or chronic confusion does not satisfy the requirements for ESI level 2. Acute confusion, lethargy, or disorientation can result from several serious medical issues, such as stroke, transient ischemic attack, other brain structural abnormalities, metabolic or electrolyte disturbances like hypoglycemia or hyponatremia, and toxicological problems.

This part of the algorithm is typically straightforward and offers minimal room for misinterpretation. When a patient arrives at triage with an unknown medical history and is confused, lethargic, or disoriented, the triage nurse should presume these symptoms are new and assign the patient to ESI level 2. However, if the patient exhibits new confusion, lethargy, or disorientation and needs an immediate life-saving intervention as outlined earlier, they should be categorized as ESI level 1.

##### Severe Pain/Distress

The last consideration in deciding if the patient qualifies for level-2 criteria is whether they are experiencing severe pain or distress. The patient must be evaluated for signs of significant pain or distress. Any patient reporting a pain score of 7 out of 10 or higher should be considered as potentially meeting ESI level-2 criteria.

The word "considered" holds significant importance. It is ultimately the triage nurse’s judgment to decide if the combination of the patient’s clinical condition and reported pain level justifies assigning an ESI level 2. For instance, a patient whose toe was struck by a heavy metal object might report their pain as 10 out of 10. The patient could indeed have a fracture and be in intense pain, and may not have attempted any pain relief before arriving at the emergency department. In this scenario, the appropriate triage level would be ESI level 4, as only one resource—an x-ray—will be required. The triage nurse should provide comfort measures at triage, such as applying ice, elevating the foot, and administering pain medication if protocols allow, to help alleviate the pain. The nurse should accept the patient’s report of 10/10 pain and address it during triage. Nevertheless, this patient can safely wait to be seen and should not be prioritized for the last available bed. In conclusion, the triage nurse evaluates not just the patient’s reported pain score, but also considers the main complaint, medical history, and the patient’s physical presentation when assigning a triage level. Patients for whom severe pain could justify an ESI level 2 rating include:

A patient experiencing severe (10/10) flank pain and visibly writhing during triage.

An 80-year-old woman experiencing generalized abdominal pain rated 7 out of 10, accompanied by intense nausea.

A 30-year-old individual experiencing an acute pain crisis due to sickle cell disease.

A cancer patient experiencing intense pain.

Any burn, whether full-thickness or partial-thickness, that necessitates prompt pain management.

All emergency department patients should be evaluated for pain and asked to rate their pain using a tool like the visual analog scale. Many triage nurses feel uneasy about recording a patient’s pain score and then having the patient wait to be seen. It is essential for triage nurses to recognize that a patient’s self-reported pain score is just one aspect of the overall pain assessment. For instance, triage nurses often encounter patients who appear comfortable—such as laughing, talking on the phone, or eating—yet claim their pain is 10 or higher. Triage nurses should assign an ESI level 2 if a patient reports a pain score of 7 out of 10 or more and the nurse’s subjective and objective evaluation indicates that the pain requires interventions beyond what can be provided at triage. In such cases, the triage nurse determines that it would not be appropriate for the patient to wait and assigns them to the last available bed.

Ultimately, when deciding if a patient qualifies for ESI level-2, the triage nurse needs to evaluate for severe distress, which can be either physiological or psychological. Beyond pain, patients with significant respiratory distress fulfill the physiological criteria for ESI level 2. Severe psychological distress may be seen in patients who are:

Overwhelmed with distress following a sexual assault.

Displaying disruptive behavior during triage.

Aggressive.

Individuals who have experienced domestic abuse.

Undergoing an intense response to grief.

These patients are typically prioritized by the triage nurse to be taken directly to the treatment area, allowing them to bypass the waiting room.

##### Summary

We have examined the essential elements and questions required to assess if a patient qualifies for ESI level-2. It is vital for the triage nurse to take these questions into account when evaluating every patient. Overlooking a high-risk scenario could lead to longer wait times and possibly adverse outcomes for the patient.

### Chapter 5. Expected Resource Needs

Historically, triage systems have relied exclusively on assessing the severity of a patient’s condition. In these systems, nurses determine an acuity level by judging how long a patient can safely wait before being evaluated by a healthcare provider. The Emergency Severity Index (ESI) introduces a different method by not only considering which patients require immediate attention, but also, for those with less severe conditions, estimating the resources that will likely be needed to manage their care. This chapter provides background on the rationale for incorporating resource prediction into the ESI and explains what is considered a resource. It also presents examples of patients classified as ESI levels 3 to 5, along with the anticipated resources each will require.

Traditionally, comprehensive triage has served as the primary approach for assigning triage acuity in U.S. emergency departments (Emergency Nurses Association [ENA], 1997, pp. 3-10; Gilboy, Travers & Wuerz, 1999). These triage systems rely on the nurse’s evaluation of vital signs, both subjective and objective data, medical history, allergies, and current medications to establish the level of triage acuity.

Resource prediction plays a crucial role in the ESI for patients categorized as ESI level 3, 4, or 5. It is essential to note that resource allocation is not relevant for patients with high acuity, such as those at ESI level 1 or 2. The inclusion of resource prediction sets the ESI apart from other triage systems that rely solely on acuity. When Drs. Wuerz and Eitel developed the ESI triage system, they incorporated resource utilization to provide additional information and enable more precise triage decisions. They believed that experienced emergency department (ED) triage nurses could accurately anticipate the types and quantities of tests, treatments, and consultations a patient would require during their ED visit. This has been confirmed by recent studies on ESI implementation and validation, which have demonstrated that triage nurses can predict the resource needs of ED patients (Eitel, Travers, Rosenau, Gilboy & Wuerz, 2003; Tanabe, Gimbel, Yarnold & Adams, 2004). One such study, conducted across seven EDs in diverse regions—including both urban and rural settings, as well as academic and community hospitals—found that nurses using the ESI accurately predicted the number of resources needed by ED patients 70 percent of the time. In other words, ESI classification by experienced triage nurses reliably forecasts at triage how many resources patients will need to reach ED disposition, and, more importantly, distinguishes between patients who will require low versus high resource intensity. This differentiation based on resource needs enables more efficient patient flow at ED presentation by directing patients into different operational pathways, allowing for parallel processing. Additionally, research has shown that ESI triage levels are associated with key patient outcomes, such as admission and mortality rates (Eitel et al., 2003).

It is important to remember that resource prediction applies solely to patients who are less acutely ill. At decision points A and B in the ESI algorithm (Figure 5-1), the nurse determines if patients qualify for ESI levels 1 or 2 based exclusively on their acuity. In contrast, at decision point C, the nurse assigns ESI levels 3 through 5 by evaluating both the patient’s acuity and anticipated resource requirements. Therefore, the triage nurse takes resource needs into account only when the responses to decision points A and B are “no.”

To determine what resources ED patients require, the triage nurse should have a broad understanding of emergency department care standards and, more specifically, know what is considered reasonable and typical emergency care. A simple way to approach this is to consider, “Based on this patient’s main complaint, which resources are emergency providers most likely to use?”

The triage nurse relies on information gathered from a brief subjective and objective assessment, along with details such as past medical history, current medications, age, and gender, to estimate how many resources the ED provider will require to make a decision about the patient’s care. For instance, a healthy teenager with a straightforward leg laceration and no significant medical history would likely need just one resource: suturing. Conversely, an elderly patient with several chronic conditions and no prior episodes of dizziness who arrives with a head laceration after a fall will obviously require multiple resources, such as suturing, laboratory tests, ECG, imaging, or specialist consultations. Proper application of ESI triage depends on the nurse’s ability to anticipate resource needs, making it a task best suited for an experienced emergency nurse. Overall, regardless of the triage system in place, we maintain that triage should be conducted by a skilled emergency nurse to ensure patient safety.

Table 5-1 (also referenced as Table 3-1) outlines the guidelines for classifying resources within the ESI triage system. The distinction between ESI levels 3, 4, and 5 is based on the nurse’s assessment of the number of resources a patient will require for disposition. According to the triage nurse’s judgment, patients anticipated to need no resources are assigned to level 5, those expected to need one resource are placed in level 4, and patients likely to require two or more resources are categorized as ESI level 3. Research has shown that patients needing two or more resources experience higher rates of hospital admission, increased mortality, and longer emergency department stays (Eitel et al., 2003; Tanabe et al., 2004 Reliability and validity).

While Table 5-1 does not include every possible resource, it offers general direction regarding the types of diagnostic tests, procedures, and treatments that are considered resources within the ESI system. Emergency nurses using the ESI should avoid focusing too much on the specific definitions of each resource. The key point is that ESI only requires the triage nurse to estimate the resources a patient will likely need during their ED visit. Table 5-1 lists the most frequently used resources, but it is neither feasible nor necessary to list every potential ED resource. For accurate ESI assignment, it is sufficient to determine whether a patient will require no resources, one resource, or two or more resources. Once a triage nurse identifies two likely resources, further estimation is unnecessary. The main purpose of the ESI resource component is to distinguish patients with more complex, resource-intensive needs from those with simpler issues. For ESI triage, resources are defined as interventions that go beyond a basic exam or minor interventions by ED staff, or that involve personnel outside the ED. Resources that demand significant ED staff time (such as administering IV medications or inserting a chest tube) or require assistance from outside departments (like radiology for x-rays or surgical consultations) tend to increase the patient’s length of stay in the ED and reflect a higher level of patient complexity and triage category.

There are frequently asked questions regarding what qualifies as an ESI resource. One common question concerns how many blood or urine tests and x-rays count as a resource. According to the ESI triage system, the triage nurse should consider the number of different types of resources required to decide the patient’s disposition, rather than counting each individual test.

A complete blood count (CBC) and an electrolyte panel together make up a single laboratory test resource.

A complete blood count and a chest x-ray are two types of resources (laboratory test and imaging).

A CBC and a urinalysis are both laboratory tests, and when performed together, they are considered a single resource.

A chest x-ray and standard skull radiographs are one type of resource (x-ray).

Cervical spine X-rays and a head CT scan are two imaging resources (an X-ray and a CT scan).

Another commonly debated resource is the use of a splint, which is not considered a resource. If it were, patients with ankle sprains would be classified as ESI level 3 (requiring an x-ray and splint). Although applying a splint can require significant effort, it is crucial to remember that resource prediction is solely intended to categorize patients and ensure they are directed to the appropriate area within the emergency department. In many emergency departments, ESI level-3 patients are not suitable for fast track or urgent care sections. Triage scores do not reflect the overall intensity of nursing workload.

Another frequently asked question about ESI resources concerns the inclusion of eye irrigation as a resource. Patients who experience a chemical splash to the eye are typically classified as ESI level-2 due to the high-risk nature of their injury, so the need for eye irrigation does not influence their ESI level. On the other hand, if the eye issue is caused by dust particles, the patient is not automatically considered high risk. In such cases, eye irrigation is counted as a resource, placing the patient at ESI level-4. The eye examination itself is not considered a resource since it is part of the standard physical exam. Additional questions about resources are discussed in the Frequently Asked Questions section of Chapter 5 in Appendix A.

Clinicians often ask about the items categorized as “not resources” in Table 5-1. This list is designed to help triage nurses efficiently and accurately assign patients to one of five clinically distinct levels (Wuerz, Milne, Eitel, Travers & Gilboy, 2000). Items considered not to be resources include physical examinations, point-of-care testing, and procedures that generally do not increase a patient’s length of stay in the emergency department or suggest greater complexity. Because it is standard practice for all ED patients to receive a basic history and physical exam, these assessments—including pelvic exams—are not counted as resources for ESI classification. The strength of the ESI lies in its straightforwardness; the main aim of identifying resources is to distinguish patients with more complex needs who require two or more resources (level 3 or higher) from those with less complicated issues who will likely need fewer than two resources (level 4 or 5). Emergency nurses should avoid overcomplicating the ESI by focusing too much on the specifics of resource definitions. In most cases, a patient will need either no resources, one resource, or two or more resources.

Although resource use can differ depending on the location, provider, or even the individual patient, triage nurses are encouraged to base their ESI resource predictions on the typical management of the most frequent presenting issues. Ideally, any patient arriving at an emergency department should require roughly the same resources. For instance, if a provider evaluates an 82-year-old nursing home resident with an indwelling urinary catheter who presents with fever and cough, it is likely that blood tests, urine tests, and a chest x-ray will be ordered. The triage nurse can reasonably anticipate that this patient will need two or more resources and should therefore assign an ESI level 3.

While there may be slight differences in procedures among various emergency departments, these usually do not significantly impact the triage rating. For instance, some departments perform pregnancy tests within the ED (which is not considered a resource by ESI), while others send the tests to the lab (which is considered a resource by ESI). However, it is uncommon for patients to require only a pregnancy test, as most will need at least one or two additional resources. One variation in ED practices that could lead to different ESI levels is how patients with a sole complaint of sore throat are managed. In some hospitals, it is standard to take throat cultures (counted as one resource, ESI level 4), whereas in others, this is not routinely done (no resources, ESI level 5). Another example of practice variation is the application of the Ottawa Ankle Rules, which are evidence-based guidelines to decide if an ankle x-ray is necessary for patients with ankle injuries. The extent to which these rules are used differs between institutions. Facilities that implement these rules at triage may order fewer x-rays compared to those that do not regularly use them.

Temperature is a key factor in evaluating the allocation of resources for infants and young children. This topic will be discussed in Chapter 6.

Clinically, patients classified as ESI level 4 and 5 can wait several hours before being seen by a provider. However, from a customer service perspective, these patients may be more appropriately managed in a fast-track or urgent care environment. Mid-level providers with the right skill set and supervision are capable of treating level-4 and 5 patients. The ESI system also offers an operational benefit, as level-5 patients can occasionally be accommodated for a brief evaluation and disposition by a provider, even when the department is full. Frequently, triage protocols specify that ESI level-4 or 5 patients may be directed to an urgent care or fast-track area.

In conclusion, the ESI introduces a novel method for emergency department triage by incorporating predictions regarding the number of resources required to determine patient disposition. For patients classified as ESI levels 3, 4, and 5, resource needs are factored into the triage level, whereas decisions for ESI levels 1 and 2 rely solely on the severity of the patient’s condition. Table 5-2 provides examples of patients in ESI levels 3, 4, and 5. In practice, estimating resource needs has proven highly useful for managing the large volume of patients presenting with non-acute issues.

### Chapter 6.The Role of Vital Signs in ESI Triage

##### Introduction Figure 6-1. Danger Zone Vital Signs

This chapter centers on decision point D, which involves evaluating the patient's vital signs. By this stage in the ESI algorithm, the triage nurse has already established that the patient does not qualify for ESI level 1 or 2 and will need two or more resources. Because the patient requires at least two resources, they are classified as at least ESI level 3. At this juncture, the nurse must review the patient’s vital signs, including heart rate, respiratory rate, and oxygen saturation, and, for children under three, temperature as well. If any of the vital signs fall within the danger zone parameters (as shown in decision point D, Figure 6-1), the nurse should seriously consider upgrading the patient’s triage level from 3 to 2.

In the ESI triage training program, significant time should be allocated to discussing how vital signs impact the decision to reclassify a patient from ESI level 3 to level 2. It is important to emphasize that the experienced triage nurse is ultimately responsible for determining if a patient qualifies for ESI level 2, taking into account the patient’s medical history, current medications, and both subjective and objective assessments, including overall appearance. This determination relies on the nurse’s clinical expertise and understanding of normal vital sign ranges for all age groups, as well as the effects of factors like medications, medical history, and pain level.

##### What Are Vital Signs?

Vital signs are typically basic measurements of physiological functions such as temperature, blood pressure, pulse, respiratory rate, and pulse oximetry (refer to Table 6-1). These measurements often guide healthcare professionals in making clinical decisions. In recent years, nursing literature has increasingly highlighted the significance of pain, with the American Pain Society coining the term “Pain: the fifth vital sign” to raise awareness about the need for thorough pain assessment and management. Evaluating pain is a crucial part of the ESI and is actually considered earlier in its process. Specifically for ESI, heart rate, respiratory rate, oxygen saturation, and temperature in children under three years old are the vital sign parameters used at decision point D. Vital signs provide objective information that helps determine a patient’s general health status and viability. The results influence how we assess a patient’s overall condition and guide our choices in diagnosis and treatment. Nevertheless, vital signs alone do not offer a complete understanding of a patient’s health. They can be influenced by various factors, including prescription drugs, herbal supplements, and recreational substances. For instance, beta-blockers can cause a slower heart rate and mask the typical rapid heart rate seen in shock. Elderly patients with hypothyroidism may have low body temperatures, even when septic. Similarly, a young adult’s high temperature could be due to recreational drug use.

Vital signs are fluctuating, dynamic markers that supplement a patient’s assessment. Their measurement can depend on the person taking them, and what is considered normal varies depending on the source referenced. Even in optimal circumstances, vital signs may not always be dependable or precise (Edmonds, Mower, Lovato & Lomeli, 2002). Often, the patient’s overall appearance and clinical context are most informative. Nevertheless, if a triage nurse believes that obtaining vital signs would assist in evaluating risk, they should be recorded. For instance, if a patient is on immunosuppressive drugs, undergoing chemotherapy, or has an illness like AIDS that suppresses the immune system, it is important to check their body temperature.

##### Are Vital Signs Necessary at Triage?

Before the introduction of five-level triage in the United States, it was customary for every patient arriving at an emergency department to have their vital signs measured prior to being assigned a triage level. Vital signs were viewed as a crucial part of the initial nursing evaluation and frequently served as a basis for decision-making. In the traditional three-level triage system, vital signs played a key role in determining how long a patient could safely wait for care; if vital signs were normal, the patient was often allowed to wait longer. As a result, vital signs historically carried significant weight in triage assessments, sometimes more so than the patient’s clinical presentation.

In recent years, updated triage models have recommended the selective use of vital signs during triage (Gilboy, Travers & Wuerz, 2000). Collecting initial vital signs is not a required part of other five-level triage systems and is generally not performed during the triage of level-1 or level-2 patients, who are the most critically ill. For instance, the Guidelines for Implementation of the Australasian Triage Scale in Emergency Departments specify that “vital signs should only be measured at triage if required to estimate urgency, or if time permits” (Australasian College for Emergency Medicine, 2000). Likewise, the Canadian Triage and Acuity Scale (CTAS) states that vital signs are only needed if they are essential for determining the triage level, particularly for levels 3, 4, and 5, and only if time allows (Beveridge et al., 2002). The Manchester Triage Group incorporates specific vital sign criteria as decision points within its flow chart, using these parameters as one of several factors to help the triage nurse determine the patient’s acuity level.

Vital signs are not always the best method for determining triage acuity. Some research indicates that vital signs may not be essential during the initial triage assessment. In 2002, Cooper, Flaherty, Lin, and Hubbell investigated how vital signs influence triage status, taking into account factors such as age and the ability to communicate. Their study involved over 14,000 patients across 24 U.S. emergency departments. The findings revealed that vital signs altered the triage acuity level in only 8% of cases. Among different age groups, children aged 2 years or younger experienced the greatest change in triage decisions, with an 11.4% shift after vital signs were obtained.

##### Vital Signs and ESI Triage

With ESI triage, the only mandatory situation for checking vital signs is for patients who do not initially qualify as ESI level 1 or 2, but are expected to require two or more resources. For patients assigned to ESI levels 1, 2, 4, or 5, taking vital signs at triage is optional and left to the triage nurse’s judgment. Although the ESI system does not mandate vital sign assessment for every patient at triage, individual institutions may have their own protocols. Hospital policies regarding vital sign collection at triage are shaped by factors like staffing, patient mix, and available resources, which are not addressed in this handbook. Generally, it is always acceptable to take vital signs when triaging a stable patient. According to ESI, vital signs are only required for level-3 patients. (Refer to Table 6-2)

The creators of the ESI and the current research team agree that experienced emergency department nurses can incorporate vital sign information alongside their clinical judgment when assigning ESI ratings to patients. However, there is limited evidence linking abnormal vital signs to emergency department acuity or confirming that these abnormalities reliably indicate serious illness. The ESI has been updated over time to incorporate new evidence and recommendations from the literature. Initially, the ESI working group relied on systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS) research (Rangel-Frausto et al., 1995) to develop the danger zone vital sign criteria and related footnotes. The first ESI version used SIRS criteria, specifically a heart rate over 90 in adults, as a definitive reason to upgrade a patient from ESI level 3 to level 2 (Wuerz, Milne, Eitel, Travers & Gilboy, 2000). Since the SIRS studies focused on mortality predictors in intensive care unit patients, applying these criteria in the ED led to too many false positives. As a result, the heart rate threshold was increased to 100 in ESI version 2, and nurses were advised to consider upgrading adult patients with heart rates above 100 to ESI level 2 (Wuerz et al., 2001; Gilboy, Tanabe, Travers, Eitel & Wuerz, 2003). The danger zone vital sign criteria were also expanded to include pediatric vital signs.

When applying the ESI triage system, it is not required to assess vital signs in the triage area for patients who are promptly assigned to level 1 or 2. If a patient appears unstable or has a primary complaint that demands immediate intervention, they should be quickly moved to the treatment area. In these cases, the resuscitation team will take and monitor vital signs at the bedside. This includes patients whose clinical presentation suggests a high risk or an urgent need for cardiovascular or respiratory support, such as those who look pale, sweaty, or cyanotic. Nevertheless, the triage nurse may choose to check vital signs in the triage area if there is no available bed or if they believe the information will help determine the correct triage level. Some patients may only be recognized as ESI level 1 after their vital signs are measured. For instance, an elderly patient who is awake and alert but complains of dizziness could be found to have a critical condition if their heart rate is discovered to be 32 or 180 during the assessment.

As outlined in the ESI algorithm in Chapter 3, when patients do not qualify for ESI level-1 or 2, the triage nurse proceeds to decision point C. At this stage, the nurse evaluates how many resources the patient is likely to require in the emergency department. If only one or no resources are anticipated, the patient can be categorized as ESI level 4 or 5, and a vital sign check is not needed. However, if two or more resources are expected to be necessary, the nurse moves to decision point D, where vital signs should be measured. Vital signs are particularly significant for some patients during triage, especially those assigned to ESI level 3, as their values can provide additional evidence of possible serious illness. If any vital signs fall within the danger zone, it is advised that the triage nurse consider upgrading the patient’s triage level from 3 to 2.

The ESI triage system specifically incorporates heart rate, respiratory rate, and oxygen saturation (for patients who may have respiratory issues) as vital signs. Temperature is only factored in for children younger than three years old. Notably, blood pressure is not part of the ESI algorithm when evaluating abnormal vital signs. However, this does not imply that triage nurses should avoid measuring blood pressure or temperature in older children or adults; rather, these measurements are not typically used to determine the correct triage acuity level.

##### Vital Signs and Pediatric Fever

In this edition of the ESI Handbook, version 4 (v.4) of the ESI algorithm has been revised to reflect updated pediatric fever guidelines. As illustrated in Figure 6-2, note D of the ESI algorithm covers pediatric fever criteria relevant to ESI triage. This part includes guidance from the American College of Emergency Physicians’ Clinical Policy for Children Under Three Years Old Presenting to the Emergency Department With Fever (ACEP, 2003).

The ESI Triage Research Team advises that vital signs should be checked in patients younger than 3 years old during triage. Specifically, taking a temperature is crucial for all children from birth up to 36 months, and assessing vital signs is a key part of evaluating any infant under 36 months with a known fever (Baraff, 2000). This process helps distinguish between ESI level-2 and level-3 patients and reduces the chance that children who may have bacteremia are directed to fast-track care or face inappropriate delays. It is important to note that any patient who is in immediate danger or at high risk will be categorized as ESI level 1 or 2.

Table 6-3 offers guidance for triage nurses on using the ESI to evaluate febrile children and select the most suitable triage level. Fever is commonly defined as a rectal temperature above 38.0° C (100.4° F) (Baraff et al., 1993; ACEP, 2003). Infants younger than 28 days with a fever should be regarded as high risk and given at least an ESI level 2. For infants aged 28 days to 3 months, there are no definitive guidelines. The ESI research team advises triage nurses to follow their hospital’s protocols. It is recommended that nurses consider assigning at least an ESI level 2 to these patients.

In version 4 of the ESI, we have adopted a different set of guidelines for managing fever in children aged 3 to 36 months. These guidelines focus on children with high fevers, defined as temperatures above 39.0° C (102.2° F) (ACEP, 2003). When evaluating a highly febrile child in this age group, the triage nurse should determine the child’s immunization status and whether there is a clear cause for the fever. If the child is not fully immunized or if no source for the fever can be identified, the child should be categorized as at least ESI level 3. If the child’s immunizations are current and there is an identifiable reason for the fever, an ESI level of 4 or 5 is suitable. For instance, a 7-month-old who is under pediatric care, has received the Haemophilus influenza type b (HIB) vaccine, and presents with a fever while tugging at his ear could be classified as ESI level 5.

##### Case Examples

The case studies below illustrate how vital signs information is utilized during ESI triage.

A healthy-appearing 28-year-old woman states, “My doctor said I’m approximately 6 weeks pregnant, and I believe I might be having a miscarriage.” She explains, “I began spotting this morning and am now experiencing cramps.” She has no allergies or past medical history and is taking prenatal vitamins. Her vital signs are: temperature 98°F, heart rate 112, respiratory rate 22, and blood pressure 90/60.

This patient qualifies for an upgrade from level 3 to level 2 triage due to her vital signs. Her elevated heart rate and respiratory rate, along with low blood pressure, are worrisome. These symptoms may suggest internal hemorrhage caused by a ruptured ectopic pregnancy.

The mother of a 15-month-old reports that her baby has been experiencing diarrhea since the previous day. She mentions that everyone in the family has recently had the gastrointestinal virus that is circulating. The baby has shown reduced appetite, a mild fever, and several episodes of watery stools. The child is calmly sitting on the mother’s lap. The triage nurse observes indications of dehydration. There is no past medical history, no known drug allergies, and the baby is not on any medications. Vital signs are: temperature 100.4°F, heart rate 142, respiratory rate 48, and blood pressure 76/50.

This patient qualifies for at least ESI level 3. He will need laboratory tests and intravenous fluids as resources. Given his vital signs, the triage nurse may escalate him to ESI level 2. For an infant of this age, both heart rate and respiratory rate exceed the normal limits.

A 57-year-old woman states, “I need to see a doctor about my cough. I just can’t get rid of it. I barely slept last night because I was coughing so much, and now I’m extremely tired.” She mentions having a fever of 101° last night and is producing yellow sputum when she coughs. Her medical history includes a hysterectomy three years ago; she is not on any medications but is allergic to Penicillin. Her vital signs are: temperature 101.4°, respiratory rate 28, heart rate 100, and oxygen saturation 90 percent.

At the start of her triage evaluation, this patient appears to possibly have pneumonia. She is likely to require two or more resources, but her low oxygen levels and rapid breathing are worrisome. Based on her vital signs, the triage nurse should upgrade her to an ESI level 2.

A 34-year-old obese woman arrives at triage with complaints of diffuse abdominal pain rated 6 out of 10, lasting for 2 days. She reports multiple episodes of vomiting and notes that her last bowel movement was 3 days ago. Her medical history includes back surgery; she is not on any medications and has a peanut allergy. Her vital signs are: temperature 97.8°F, heart rate 104, respiratory rate 16, blood pressure 132/80, and oxygen saturation 99%.

This patient will require at least two resources, such as laboratory tests, IV fluids, possibly IV medication for nausea, and a CT scan. The triage nurse should assess the patient’s vital signs, paying attention to the heart rate. Although the heart rate is slightly outside the normal range for the patient’s age, this may be attributed to pain or physical activity. Therefore, the appropriate action is to categorize the patient as ESI level 3.

A crying 9-year-old arrives at triage with her mother after slipping on an icy sidewalk and hurting her right forearm. The forearm appears clearly deformed, but circulation, sensation, and movement are intact. According to her mother, the child has no allergies, is not on any medications, and is otherwise healthy. Her vital signs are: blood pressure 100/68, heart rate 124, respiratory rate 32, and oxygen saturation 99 percent.

The child is in pain from her fall and is clearly distressed. She will need at least two resources: an x-ray and an orthopedic consultation, and possibly conscious sedation. Although her heart rate and breathing are increased, the triage nurse can confidently assign her to ESI level 3. The changes in her vital signs are most likely caused by pain and emotional upset.

A 72-year-old woman arrives at the emergency department using nasal cannula oxygen for her advanced COPD. She tells the triage nurse that she has an infected cat bite on her left hand, which appears red, swollen, and tender. She has no other health issues, uses albuterol as needed, and takes a daily aspirin. She has no known drug allergies. Her vital signs are: temperature 99.6°F, heart rate 88, respiratory rate 22, blood pressure 138/80, and oxygen saturation 91%. She reports no difficulty breathing.

This patient needs at least two resources: laboratory tests and intravenous antibiotics. She qualifies for ESI level 3. Although the triage nurse observes that her oxygen saturation and respiratory rate fall outside the normal adult range, the patient has advanced COPD. Therefore, these vital signs are not worrisome, and she will remain at ESI level 3 without being up-triaged.

##### Case Examples

The case studies below illustrate how vital signs information is utilized during ESI triage.

A healthy-appearing 28-year-old woman states, “My doctor said I’m approximately 6 weeks pregnant, and I believe I might be having a miscarriage.” She reports, “I began spotting this morning and am now experiencing cramping.” She has no allergies or past medical history and is taking prenatal vitamins. Her vital signs are: temperature 98°F, heart rate 112, respiratory rate 22, and blood pressure 90/60.

This patient qualifies for an upgrade from level 3 to level 2 due to her vital signs. Her elevated heart rate and respiratory rate, along with low blood pressure, are worrisome. These symptoms may suggest internal hemorrhage caused by a ruptured ectopic pregnancy.

The mother of a 15-month-old reports that her baby has been experiencing diarrhea since the previous day. She mentions that everyone in the family has recently had the gastrointestinal virus that is circulating. The baby has shown reduced appetite, a mild fever, and several episodes of watery stools. The child is calmly sitting on the mother’s lap. The triage nurse observes indications of dehydration. There is no past medical history, no known drug allergies, and the baby is not on any medications. Vital signs are: temperature 100.4°F, heart rate 142, respiratory rate 48, and blood pressure 76/50.

This patient qualifies for at least ESI level 3. He will need laboratory tests and intravenous fluids as resources. Given his vital signs, the triage nurse may escalate him to ESI level 2. In an infant of this age, both heart rate and respiratory rate exceed the normal limits.

A 57-year-old woman states, “I need to see a doctor about my cough. I just can’t get rid of it. I barely slept last night because I was coughing so much, and now I’m extremely tired.” She mentions having a fever of 101° last night and is producing yellow sputum when she coughs. Her medical history includes a hysterectomy three years ago; she is not on any medications but is allergic to penicillin. Her vital signs are: temperature 101.4°, respiratory rate 28, heart rate 100, and oxygen saturation 90 percent.

At the start of her triage evaluation, this patient appears to possibly have pneumonia. She is likely to require two or more resources, but her low oxygen levels and rapid breathing are worrisome. Based on her vital signs, the triage nurse should upgrade her to an ESI level 2.

A 34-year-old obese woman arrives at triage with complaints of diffuse abdominal pain rated 6 out of 10, ongoing for the past two days. She reports multiple episodes of vomiting and notes that her last bowel movement was three days ago. Her medical history includes back surgery; she is not on any medications and has a peanut allergy. Her vital signs are: temperature 97.8°F, heart rate 104, respiratory rate 16, blood pressure 132/80, and oxygen saturation 99%.

This patient will require at least two resources, such as laboratory tests, intravenous fluids, possibly IV medication for nausea, and a CT scan. The triage nurse should assess the patient’s vital signs, paying attention to the heart rate. Although the heart rate is slightly outside the normal range for the patient’s age, this may be attributed to pain or physical activity. Therefore, the appropriate action is to categorize the patient as ESI level 3.

A crying 9-year-old arrives at triage with her mother after slipping on an icy sidewalk and hurting her right forearm. The forearm appears clearly deformed, but circulation, sensation, and movement are intact. According to her mother, the child has no allergies, is not on any medications, and is otherwise healthy. Her vital signs are: blood pressure 100/68, heart rate 124, respiratory rate 32, and oxygen saturation 99 percent.

The child is in pain from her fall and is clearly distressed. She will need at least two resources: an x-ray and an orthopedic consultation, and possibly conscious sedation. Although her heart rate and breathing are increased, the triage nurse can confidently assign her to ESI level 3. The changes in her vital signs are most likely caused by pain and emotional upset.

A 72-year-old woman arrives at the emergency department using nasal cannula oxygen for her advanced COPD. She tells the triage nurse that she has an infected cat bite on her left hand, which appears red, swollen, and tender. She has no other health issues, uses albuterol as needed, and takes a daily aspirin. She has no known drug allergies. Her vital signs are: temperature 99.6°F, heart rate 88, respiratory rate 22, blood pressure 138/80, and oxygen saturation 91%. She reports no difficulty breathing.

This patient needs at least two resources: laboratory tests and intravenous antibiotics. She qualifies for ESI level 3. Although the triage nurse observes that her oxygen saturation and respiratory rate are abnormal for a typical adult, the patient has advanced COPD. Therefore, these vital signs are not worrisome in her case, and she will remain at ESI level 3 without being up-triaged.

##### Conclusion

This chapter lays the groundwork for comprehending how vital signs are used within the Emergency Severity Index triage system. It also discusses the unique considerations for patients younger than 36 months. More research is needed to determine the most appropriate vital sign thresholds for emergency department triage. Additional studies will focus on pediatric patients arriving at the emergency department. We anticipate that future updates to the ESI will incorporate new evidence about how well triage vital signs predict outcomes for both pediatric and adult patients.

### Appendix A. Frequently Asked Questions

##### Chapter 3.

###### Frequently Asked Questions

1. Is it necessary to raise an adult patient’s triage level if their heart rate exceeds 100?

No, it is something to take into account.

2. Is it necessary to increase a patient’s triage level if their pain score is 7 out of 10 or higher?

No, this is just one aspect to take into account.

If a patient is chronically confused, does that mean they should always be assigned to ESI level 2?

No, patients experiencing a sudden change in consciousness are classified as ESI level 2.

4. At what times should vital signs be measured?

For any patient classified as ESI level-3, vital signs are always taken if the triage nurse believes they could be helpful.

##### Chapter 4.

###### Frequently Asked Questions

Am I required to assign an ESI triage level of 2 to a 25-year-old woman who reports her pain as 10 out of 10 but is eating potato chips?

No. Since her vital signs are stable and she doesn’t meet any high-risk criteria, this patient should be categorized as ESI level 3. She will probably require lab tests and at least two resources, such as x-rays, an IV, or pain medication. Therefore, you should not allocate your last available bed to her.

Should an 80-year-old woman with ongoing confusion be assigned an ESI level 2 during triage?

No. The sudden appearance of confusion, lethargy, or disorientation qualifies for ESI level 2.

3. Shouldn’t a patient experiencing ongoing chest pain be classified as ESI level 1? After all, they ought to receive the highest priority.

Not every patient presenting with chest pain qualifies for ESI level-1. Patients who are unresponsive, without a pulse, not breathing, or in need of urgent life-saving measures fall under level-1. Those with chest pain who appear pale, sweaty, have low blood pressure, or slow heart rate, and need rapid IV access to stabilize their condition, are also considered level-1. Patients who are stable but experiencing ongoing chest pain generally meet high-risk criteria and should be assigned ESI level 2, with prompt placement arranged.

##### Chapter 5.

###### Frequently Asked Questions

1. Why isn’t teaching someone how to use crutches considered a resource?

Although teaching patients how to use crutches can take up a significant amount of the emergency department staff’s time, this instruction is frequently given to individuals with uncomplicated ankle sprains. These cases are generally categorized as ESI level 4 (ankle x-ray = one resource). Such patients are clearly less acute and require fewer resources compared to more complicated cases, such as those with tibia or fibula fractures, who are typically ESI level 3 (leg x-rays, orthopedic consultation, casting or splinting, IV pain management = two or more resources). Using a nursing resource intensity measure would more accurately represent the ED staff’s efforts in providing crutch-walking instruction.

2. Why doesn’t a splint count as a resource?

Using basic, pre-made splints (like those for ankle sprains) does not count as a resource. However, when ED staff create and apply splints, such as thumb spica splints for thumb fractures, this is considered a resource. To distinguish between patients with extremity injuries: those suspected of having fractures should be assigned ESI level 3 (requiring two or more resources, such as x-rays, pain management, and the creation and application of splints or casts), while those likely to have simple sprains should be classified as ESI level 4.

3. Why isn’t a saline or heparin lock considered a resource?

In general, placing a heparin lock does not require much time from the emergency department staff. Nevertheless, most patients who receive heparin locks also need at least two additional resources, such as lab tests or IV medications, which means they are typically categorized as ESI level 3 regardless.

Are all patients undergoing conscious sedation classified as ESI level 3 or above?

Conscious sedation is regarded as a complex procedure (requiring two resources) and is typically carried out on patients who are also undergoing laboratory tests, x-rays, or additional interventions like fracture reduction or dilation and curettage.

5. Are eye irrigation, administration of nebulized medications, and blood transfusions classified as resources?

All three are regarded as resources in the context of ESI triage ratings. These resources are typically utilized for patients with more acute conditions, demand considerable time from emergency department staff, and are likely to result in extended patient stays.

6. Do all patients with asthma fall under ESI level 4 since they will need nebulized treatment?

No. Asthma patients who are stable and only need nebulized medication are classified as ESI level 4. Some, however, experience severe respiratory distress and qualify for ESI level 2. Others fall in between, needing intravenous steroids or an x-ray along with nebulized treatments, and are categorized as ESI level 3. Lastly, those who just need a prescription refill for their inhaler are assigned ESI level 5, as they do not need any resources.

##### Chapter 6.

###### Frequently Asked Questions

Why are vital signs not necessary for triaging patients classified as ESI level 1 and 2?

Vital signs are not required to classify patients as life-threatening (ESI level 1) or high-risk (ESI level 2). Because patients at ESI levels 1 and 2 are in critical condition, they need an immediate response from the medical team. Multiple actions can take place at the same time, and vital signs may be obtained during the initial evaluation in the main acute section of the emergency department.

2. Why are vital signs not mandatory for patients classified as ESI level-4 and 5?

Vital signs are not required to classify patients as low or no resource (ESI level 4 or 5). Additionally, the pain, anxiety, and discomfort experienced during an emergency department visit can often affect a patient’s vital signs, which may normalize soon after the initial evaluation. However, if there are indications of abnormal symptoms—such as altered skin color, mental status changes, dizziness, or sweating—a nurse may decide to check vital signs. If there are no physical signs suggesting the need for vital sign assessment, the patient can proceed to the main emergency department or express care area.

3. What is the reason for taking vital signs on patients classified as ESI level-3?

Vital signs help distinguish between patients who require multiple resources and are stable (ESI level 3) and those who may be unstable or at higher risk (ESI level 2). Sometimes, patients classified as ESI level 3 may actually have unstable vital signs despite appearing stable. For ESI level-3 patients, checking vital signs acts as an important safety measure. Typically, ESI level-3 patients have more complex conditions and many end up being admitted to the hospital. Because they are not suitable for the fast-track area, these patients may need to wait for more comprehensive care. They pose a particular challenge during triage, making it essential for caregivers to use vital signs to ensure the correct ESI level is assigned.

4. Why are temperatures always taken for pediatric patients under 36 months of age?

Temperature helps distinguish pediatric patients who require few or no resources (ESI level 4 or 5) from those likely to need multiple resources. In infants younger than 3 months, an abnormal temperature may suggest bacteremia and categorize the child as high-risk.

5. Why does the literature offer differing perspectives on the importance of vital signs in the triage process?

There is no conclusive evidence regarding the usefulness of vital signs in emergency department triage. Numerous factors can impact the reliability of vital sign measurements, which are somewhat dependent on the person performing the assessment. In certain situations, vital signs can be influenced by factors like long-term medication use (for example, beta-blockers). Additionally, vital signs may serve to meet some public health responsibilities that emergency departments have. Finally, vital signs assist in categorizing young pediatric patients into different groups.

6. Does JCAHO mandate that vital signs be taken during triage?

The Joint Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations does not explicitly set a standard for vital signs. However, it does state that physiologic parameters should be evaluated based on the patient's condition.

7. Should the vital sign thresholds in the danger zone box be strictly enforced?

In everyday practice, surpassing the danger zone vital sign thresholds leads to up-triage being “considered” instead of being done automatically. The skilled triage nurse must apply sound clinical judgment when assigning the patient’s ESI level. This decision involves evaluating the patient’s vital signs, medical history, medications, and overall clinical presentation. Further research is necessary to establish how well vital signs at triage predict outcomes and to define exact thresholds for up-triage.

8. What should be done if patients classified as ESI level-4 or 5 exhibit danger zone vital signs?

Although taking vital signs is not necessary to assign ESI levels 4 or 5, many patients may still have their vitals checked during triage if that is part of the emergency department’s standard procedures. According to the ESI triage guidelines, the triage nurse does not need to consider vital signs when determining if a patient qualifies for ESI level 5 (no resources) or ESI level 4 (one resource). Nevertheless, in real-world settings, a careful nurse will use clinical judgment and may factor in vital sign data when assigning the ESI level. For example, if a patient only wants a prescription refill, has no acute symptoms, and presents with a heart rate of 104 after walking to the ED, the nurse may still assign an ESI level 5. Conversely, if the same patient has a heart rate of 148 and it is irregular, the nurse should assign an ESI level 2. The triage nurse must also address situations such as elevated blood pressure in a patient otherwise classified as ESI level 4 or 5. If the patient has no symptoms related to the high blood pressure, the triage level should remain unchanged. Typically, elevated blood pressure in an asymptomatic patient will not be managed in the ED, but it is important to refer the patient to a primary care provider for further evaluation and long-term management.

# Emergency Severity Index, Version 4: Implementation Handbook

### Note from the Director

The Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality is proud to present the Emergency Severity Index, Version 4: Implementation Handbook. This guide details every aspect of the Emergency Severity Index (ESI), a five-level triage system used in emergency departments to categorize patients into five groups—ranging from 1 (most urgent) to 5 (least urgent)—based on the severity of their condition and the resources they require.

Following the creation of the ESI by emergency physicians Richard Wuerz and David Eitel in 1998 and successful pilot testing, the ESI Triage Group was established. Additional development of the ESI was supported by a grant from AHRQ. This group, made up of clinicians, managers, educators, and researchers, continued to improve the algorithm into its current form.

Aligned with our mission to enhance the quality, safety, efficiency, and effectiveness of health care for all Americans, AHRQ places a strong focus on training. Together with the included set of two DVDs, this handbook offers essential support to emergency department nurses, physicians, and administrators in establishing a thorough ESI educational program. The resources are based on ESI Version 4, which features updates to the algorithm, particularly expanding the criteria for ESI level 1 and refining the guidelines for pediatric fever.

An effectively executed ESI program enables hospital emergency departments to quickly recognize patients requiring urgent care, more accurately identify those who can be safely and efficiently treated in a fast-track or urgent care setting instead of the main ED, and more precisely establish criteria for diverting ambulance patients away from the ED.

We hope this tool proves helpful as you continue working to enhance the quality of care in your emergency department.

### Chapter 2.Triage Acuity Systems

##### Standardization of Triage Acuity

Despite the fact that U.S. emergency departments (EDs) receive over 110 million visits annually (McCaig & Burt, 2004), there is a lack of comprehensive data on these visits at the local, regional, or national scale. This scarcity of information makes it challenging to address key questions such as “Which EDs treat the most critically ill patients?” and “What impact does patient acuity have on ED overcrowding?” Interest is increasing in developing standardized ED data systems in the United States to enhance clinical care, facilitate ED monitoring, enable benchmarking, and support research efforts (Barthell, Coonan, Finnell, Pollock, & Cochrane, 2004; Gilboy, Travers & Wuerz, 1999; Handler et al., 2004; National Center for Injury Prevention and Control).

A key data point in the emergency department is triage acuity, described by the Data Elements for Emergency Department Systems Task Force as the categorization of a patient's severity, indicating how much their condition threatens life or limb and if urgent intervention is required to relieve symptoms (NCIPC, 1997, p. 94).

There is significant inconsistency among emergency department triage acuity systems, especially within the United States (Emergency Nurses Association [ENA], 1997). Different systems use varying terminology for triage categories, and there is no universal consensus on the definitions for each level. Table 2-1 provides examples of acuity rating systems. Due to the absence of standardized triage acuity data in the U.S., it is understandable that the emergency department has been referred to as a “black box” of crucial public health information that remains mostly inaccessible in its current state (Martinez, 1995).

The Emergency Severity Index (ESI) is an innovative tool for assessing triage acuity in emergency departments. Research has demonstrated its consistency across various EDs, including those in both urban and rural areas, as well as in academic and community hospitals (Eitel, Travers, Rosenau, Gilboy & Wuerz, 2003). With widespread adoption in U.S. emergency departments, the ESI could serve as a standard method for triage acuity assessment. This chapter outlines the traditional triage systems used in U.S. EDs and reviews the research related to those systems. It then provides a brief overview of recent triage approaches developed in Australia, Canada, and the United Kingdom. The chapter ends with an examination of studies on the new ESI triage system and explores its potential advantages.

##### Triage Systems in the United States

Although numerous hospitals in the United States continue to utilize three- or four-level triage systems, there is a movement toward adopting five-level systems. The National Center for Health Statistics intends to substitute four-level triage data with five-level data in upcoming national benchmarking surveys of U.S. emergency departments. This change is driven by increasing evidence that five-level triage acuity data are more reliable and valid compared to three-level systems (personal communication, Linda McCaig, National Center for Health Statistics, October 6, 2004).

Both the ENA and the American College of Emergency Physicians (ACEP) have expressed their support for five-level triage systems in U.S. emergency departments. In 2003, a joint task force from ENA and ACEP was formed to review the evidence regarding five-level triage systems, and their work is still in progress. That same year, ACEP and ENA released a joint statement.

ACEP and ENA believe that patient care quality would improve by introducing a standardized triage scale and acuity categorization process in emergency departments. Drawing on expert consensus and current evidence, ACEP and ENA endorse the use of a dependable, validated five-level triage scale (ACEP, 2003; ENA, 2003).

A 2005 task force paper recommended both the ESI and the Canadian Triage and Acuity Scale (CTAS) as reliable and valid triage methods (Fernandes et al., 2005). With increasing evidence favoring five-level triage systems, it is probable that a greater number of U.S. hospitals have adopted some version of this approach. The ENA intends to gather information on the types of triage systems used in U.S. hospitals in their next ED survey.

##### Research on Triage Systems in the United States

Research on triage acuity systems is increasing, with studies primarily examining two important aspects of triage nurses’ acuity ratings: reliability and validity (Pedhazur & Schmelkin, 1991; Waltz, Strickland & Lenz, 1991). Reliability refers to the consistency or level of agreement among users of a rating system. In the context of emergency department (ED) triage, there are two relevant types of reliability. Interrater reliability assesses whether two different nurses would assign the same triage acuity level to the same patient, while intrarater reliability evaluates if the same nurse would give the same rating to the same patient at different times. Multiple studies in the United States have found that traditional three-level triage systems often have low interrater and intrarater reliability (Gill, Reese & Diamond, 1996; Travers, Waller, Bowling, Flowers & Tintinalli, 2002; Wuerz, Fernandes & Alarcon, 1998). For example, in one study, 305 triage assessments were analyzed after all triage nurses completed a required refresher course on the hospital’s three-level triage system (Travers et al., 2002). The initial ratings by the triage nurses were compared to retrospective ratings made by an expert panel of ED triage nurses, and the two groups agreed in only about half of the cases.

Validity refers to how accurately the rating system measures what it is supposed to measure. In the context of acuity ratings, validity indicates whether a label such as “nonurgent” truly reflects the absence of urgency in an emergency department patient’s condition. Assessing the validity of triage acuity has been challenging, and research studies have not reported on it.

In contrast to urine culture—which serves as the gold standard for accurately diagnosing urinary tract infections—there is no definitive gold standard for assessing the accuracy of triage acuity ratings in the conventional three-level triage system used in the United States. Nevertheless, surrogate indicators such as admission rates, resource use, and six-month mortality have been employed to evaluate five-level triage systems.

##### Triage Acuity Research on Five- Level Systems Abroad

Highly reliable and well-established five-level triage systems are now the norm in several other countries. Table 2-2 outlines three of these systems.

The Australasian Triage Scale (ATS), created in Australia, has been implemented across Australia and New Zealand since the early 1990s (Australasian College for Emergency Medicine, 1994, 2002; Cameron, Bradt & Ashby, 1996). The Australian Council on Healthcare Standards uses the ATS as the foundation for emergency department (ED) evaluation and quality assurance, with triage classifications regularly reviewed. Australian EDs are required to manage patients according to guidelines determined by their triage level. For instance, emergency cases must be attended to within 10 minutes, while nonurgent cases should be seen within 2 hours.

Several studies have assessed the validity and reliability of the ATS. Since there is no definitive gold standard for evaluating triage acuity, researchers have compared the five-level system to other illness severity scales and patient outcomes (Cameron et al., 1996; Cleary, Ashby, Jelinek & Lagaida, 1994; Erwich, Bond, Phillips, & Baggoley, 1997). Triage categories have shown strong correlations with disease- and population-specific measures, such as the Injury Severity Scales, trauma scores, and scales for cardiac, asthma, and pediatric patients. The ATS has also demonstrated a strong relationship with resource use and outcome indicators, including admission rates, emergency department length of stay, and mortality. Additionally, studies in which triage nurses assigned acuity levels to case scenarios have found that the ATS exhibits fair to moderate interrater reliability (Dilley & Standen, 1998; Jelinek & Little, 1996).

Five-level triage systems have been adopted in both the United Kingdom (U.K.) and Canada. In the U.K., the Manchester Triage Scale is utilized.

The system, developed in the U.K., uses a flow-chart presentation style (Manchester Triage Group, 1997). Nurses begin by determining the patient's main complaint, then select one of 52 flow charts to guide a structured interview and assign a triage category ranging from 1 (requiring immediate attention) to 5 (care needed within four hours). The Accident and Emergency Nurses Association has endorsed this system (Zimmermann, 2001). However, research on the Manchester system is limited. In one reliability study, triage assessments by nurses were retrospectively compared to those of senior medical staff, with only fair to moderate agreement found (Goodacre, Gillett, Harris & Houlihan, 1999).

The Canadian Triage and Acuity Scale (CTAS) was created by a team of Canadian emergency physicians (Beveridge & Ducharme, 1997; Canadian Association for Emergency Physicians [CAEP], 2002). Both the National Emergency Nurses' Affiliation, Inc. (NENA) and the Canadian Association for Emergency Physicians (CAEP) have recognized CTAS as the national benchmark for emergency department triage. Canadian hospitals are mandated to report data, including CTAS scores, for all emergency department visits to the Canadian government. Research has demonstrated that the Canadian five-level scale provides strong interrater reliability when clinicians assess the severity of written scenarios based on real patient cases.

##### History of the Emergency Severity Index (ESI)

The Emergency Severity Index (ESI) is a five-level triage system created by emergency department physicians Richard Wuerz and David Eitel in the United States (Gilboy et al., 1999; Wuerz, Milne, Eitel, Travers & Gilboy, 2000). The creators believed that a key function of an emergency department triage tool is to help prioritize patients according to the urgency of their conditions. Triage nurses assess priority by asking, “Who should be seen first?” However, Drs. Wuerz and Eitel recognized that when several high-priority patients arrive at the same time, the question shifts to, “How long can each patient safely wait?” The ESI was designed based on a new approach to ED triage. Beyond determining which patient needs immediate attention, triage nurses using the ESI also evaluate what resources are required to move the patient through the emergency department process. The ESI maintains the traditional focus on patient urgency, but also aims to achieve a second objective: not only sorting patients, but also directing them to the appropriate resources, ensuring the right patient receives the right care at the right time and place.

The initial version (v. 1) of the ESI was first used at two university-affiliated emergency departments in the spring of 1999. By fall 2000, the ESI was updated with input from emergency department clinicians to add triage criteria for pediatric patients, and this second version (v. 2) was then introduced in five more hospitals, including both non-university teaching and community hospitals. Feedback from nurses and physicians at these locations, combined with the best available scientific evidence, led to further improvements, resulting in version 3 (v. 3) in 2001 (Wuerz et al., 2001). More recently, additional updates have been made to the tool, which is presented in this edition of the ESI handbook as version 4 (v. 4) (Tanabe et al., in press).

Emergency physicians and nurses in the United States and Canada have carried out multiple research studies evaluating the reliability and validity of the ESI. The ESI has been directly compared with traditional three-level triage systems as well as the five-level CTAS. These studies will be discussed later in the chapter. Similar to the Australasian, Canadian, and U.K. systems, the ESI triage system consists of five levels. However, it differs in both its conceptual framework and practical use. The triage systems from Australia, Canada, and the U.K. are based on the idea that triage is meant to determine how long a patient can safely wait for care in the emergency department, with specific definitions for the time to physician assessment included in their protocols. This is a key distinction between ESI and both CTAS and ATS, as ESI does not specify expected time frames for physician evaluation.

The ESI stands out because it requires the triage nurse to predict the resources a patient will need—such as diagnostic tests and procedures—in addition to assessing acuity, in order to assign a triage category for patients who are less critically ill. Figure 2-1 presents the ESI triage levels. Later chapters will explain in detail how to use the ESI to categorize emergency department patients. In summary, the process begins with evaluating acuity by considering the stability of the patient’s vital signs and the risk of an immediate threat to life or organs. For patients who are stable, the nurse then estimates the resources likely needed to reach a disposition in the emergency department, drawing on their experience. These resource requirements can vary from none to two or more.

##### Research on the Emergency Severity Index

In a preliminary study evaluating ESI v.1 ratings for 493 triage cases at two Boston hospitals in 1998, researchers determined that the system was both valid and reliable (Wuerz et al., 2000). During the study, patients were triaged at the same time by the triage nurse using the standard three-level scale and by a research nurse applying the first version of the ESI. Afterwards, an investigator, who was unaware of the research nurse’s ESI rating, assigned an ESI level based solely on the written triage note. The triage levels showed a strong correlation with the resources utilized in the emergency department and with outcomes like hospital admission. Patients with higher acuity (ESI levels 1 and 2) required more resources and had a greater likelihood of being admitted compared to those with lower acuity (ESI levels 4 and 5). The agreement between the research nurse and the investigator was high, with 77 percent matching exactly and 22 percent differing by only one triage level.

Several studies have assessed the reliability of the ESI by using the kappa statistic to determine inter-rater agreement, where kappa values range from 0 (no agreement) to 1 (perfect agreement). At one of the original ESI sites, a time series design was employed to compare triage reliability using a three-level scale before and after the introduction of ESI v.1 (Travers et al., 2002). The reliability improved, with the weighted kappa increasing from 0.53 with the three-level system to 0.68 with the five-level ESI. Another study investigated the reliability and validity of ESI v.2 during and after its implementation in triage at seven hospitals in the northeast and southeast. Over 200 triage nurses participated in an ESI triage education program, where they rated 40 case studies using the ESI (Eitel et al., 2003). The findings showed substantial inter-rater reliability, with kappa values between 0.70 and 0.80. Additionally, 386 real patient triage decisions were analyzed, revealing high inter-rater reliability with weighted kappas from 0.69 to 0.87. In a separate study conducted in a Midwestern urban emergency department, the reliability of ESI v.3 was evaluated for 403 actual patient triages, resulting in a kappa of 0.89 (Tanabe, Gimbel, Yarnold, Kyriacou & Adams, 2004).

Researchers from Canada and the United States have directly compared the inter-rater reliability of the ESI and CTAS in a randomized study (Worster et al., 2004). The study involved ten Canadian triage nurses who were experienced with CTAS. These nurses were randomly assigned to receive either ESI version 3 or CTAS refresher training, after which they evaluated 200 case studies using the respective triage system. Both groups demonstrated excellent inter-rater reliability, with kappa values of 0.89 for ESI and 0.91 for CTAS.

The effectiveness of the ESI has been assessed by analyzing outcomes in several thousand patients. Research has demonstrated consistent and strong associations between the ESI and factors such as hospitalization, emergency department length of stay, and mortality (Eitel et al., 2003; Tanabe et al., 2004; Wuerz, 2001; Wuerz et al., 2001). Additionally, the ESI has shown moderate correlations with physician evaluation and management codes, as well as nursing workload indicators (Travers et al., 2002). The ESI also enables meaningful comparisons of patient case mix across different hospitals. In one study, a stratified random sample of 200 patients was taken from each of the seven original ESI hospitals to compare case mix (Eitel et al., 2003). As anticipated, tertiary care centers had a greater proportion of high-acuity patients, while community hospitals had more patients requiring fewer resources.

A survey conducted among nursing staff at the two initial university teaching hospitals found that the response to the ESI implementation was favorable (Wuerz et al., 2001). Nurses indicated that the ESI was simpler to use and more effective for prioritizing patients for care compared to the previous three-level systems used at both locations.

In the latest ESI study, the accuracy of ESI level 2 was closely analyzed (Tanabe et al., in press). Reviewing the outcomes of 571 ESI level-2 patients across five hospitals, researchers discovered that 20 percent required immediate, life-saving treatment. The study’s authors suggested that these patients should be categorized as ESI level 1. The revised ESI version 4, discussed in later chapters of this book, incorporates changes informed by this recent research.

##### Benefits of the Emergency Severity Index

The ESI has been adopted by hospitals across various regions, including both university and community hospitals, as well as teaching and nonteaching facilities. Clinicians, managers, and researchers in these settings have recognized several advantages of ESI triage compared to traditional three-level systems. One key advantage is the ability to quickly identify patients who require immediate care. ESI triage emphasizes the efficient sorting of patients, especially when resources are limited. In some ways, ESI triage returns to the original intent of triage, as established during Napoleon’s era. It involves rapidly categorizing patients into five groups based on significant differences in anticipated resource needs, which correspond to different operational requirements. Utilizing ESI for this swift categorization can enhance patient flow through the emergency department. After an ESI triage level is determined, patients can be directed to further assessment, registration, initial treatment, or the waiting area, depending on their severity and expected resource use. For instance, patients classified as level 1 or 2 can be taken straight to the treatment area for prompt evaluation and care, while those at levels 4 and 5 may proceed to registration and then wait for an available bed.

A key concern separate from ESI triage is when to perform a full nursing assessment. Many experts agree that a comprehensive assessment does not need to take place at the initial triage station; instead, it can be completed in the main treatment area or a secondary triage area, depending on each patient’s needs and the current workload in the emergency department (Gilboy et al., 1999). At triage, only the evaluation necessary to assign an ESI level is required to help with the initial sorting of patients. Full clinical assessments are time-consuming, and conducting them at triage can delay care and lower satisfaction for patients with less severe conditions. As patient numbers and case complexity rise, leading to ED overcrowding, it is important to rethink traditional care processes to improve efficiency and effectiveness. Nevertheless, it remains essential to gather enough information to accurately determine the appropriate triage category. This is particularly important when patients face long waits to see a physician, which is common with higher patient volumes. Triage has become even more vital as waiting room times increase. Assigning a patient to an inappropriately low triage category can heighten the risk of poor outcomes due to prolonged waiting times.

Additional advantages of the ESI include its ability to identify patients who do not require care in the main emergency department and can instead be safely and more efficiently managed in a fast-track or urgent care setting. For instance, many hospitals have triage policies stating that all ESI level 4 and 5 patients may be directed to either medical urgent care or minor trauma sections of the ED. The policy also permits certain level-3 patients, such as those needing straightforward migraine treatment, to be sent to urgent care. ESI level-3 patients assigned to urgent care, as well as any patients transferred from urgent care to the acute area for more serious issues, are tracked through the quality improvement program. Nurses using the ESI have noted that it improves communication about patient acuity compared to the previous three-level triage systems used at these facilities (Wuerz et al., 2001). For example, a triage nurse can simply say to the charge nurse, “I need a bed for a level 2 patient,” and this shared terminology allows the charge nurse to understand the situation without needing a detailed patient description.

The ESI has also served as the basis for emergency department policies targeting certain groups. For instance, at one location, the psychiatric team is required to provide consultations for level 2 and 3 patients within 30 minutes, and for level 4 and 5 patients within an hour of being notified. At another facility, the ESI is part of a policy for patients over 20 weeks pregnant who come to the ED. Patients assigned ESI levels 1 and 2 receive care in the ED by emergency medicine staff with an obstetric consultation, while those classified as levels 3, 4, or 5 are directed to the hospital’s labor and delivery unit.

The ESI is also an effective method for setting thresholds to divert ambulance patients away from the ED. At Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston, the ED Diversion Policy and Guidelines define full capacity as all RN-staffed ED beds being occupied. The ESI is utilized to assess when the department is over capacity.

Studies have demonstrated that the ESI is a dependable and accurate method for assessing triage acuity. This system has been implemented in numerous emergency departments across various regions of the United States, including both academic and community hospitals. These institutions have shown that using the ESI enhances emergency department operations and patient care. Broader use of the ESI in U.S. hospitals could help create a standardized approach to triage acuity assessment, supporting benchmarking, public health monitoring, and research efforts.

### Chapter 3. Introduction to the Emergency Severity Index

The Emergency Severity Index (ESI) is an easy-to-use, five-level triage tool that classifies emergency department patients by assessing both the severity of their condition and the resources they will require. The triage nurse first evaluates the patient’s acuity. If the patient does not qualify for the highest acuity levels (ESI level 1 or 2), the nurse then considers the anticipated resource needs to assign a triage level (ESI level 3, 4, or 5). Unlike other triage systems, the ESI uniquely incorporates resource requirements into its assessment. Acuity is judged based on the stability of vital signs and the risk to life, limb, or organ function. The nurse predicts resource needs by drawing on experience with patients who have similar symptoms or injuries. Resource needs refer to the number of interventions or services a patient is likely to need before a decision about their care can be made. Once familiar with the ESI algorithm, the triage nurse can quickly and accurately assign patients to one of five clearly defined, non-overlapping categories. The ESI offers emergency departments a reliable and valid method for triage (Eitel, Travers, Rosenau, Gilboy & Wuerz, 2003; Travers, Waller, Bowling, Flowers & Tintinalli, 2002; Wuerz, Travers, Gilboy, Eitel, Rosenau & Yazhari, 2001; Tanabe, Gimbel, Yarnold, Kyriacou, & Adams, 2004; Tanabe, Gimbel, Yarnold, & Adams, 2004).

This chapter offers a detailed, step-by-step guide to triaging using the ESI algorithm. Later chapters delve deeper into essential concepts and include many examples to illustrate the nuances of applying ESI.

Algorithms are commonly utilized in emergency care settings. Most emergency healthcare providers are acquainted with the algorithms taught in programs like Basic Life Support, Advanced Cardiac Life Support, and the Trauma Nursing Core Course. These programs offer a systematic, stepwise method for clinical decision making that clinicians can master through repeated practice. At each stage, the algorithm guides the user on which questions to pose or what information to collect. Depending on the responses or data gathered, a decision is reached, and the algorithm leads the user to the subsequent step, eventually resulting in an outcome.

Using the ESI algorithm for triage requires an experienced emergency department nurse to begin at the top of the algorithm. Figure 3-1 provides a conceptual summary of the ESI algorithm, highlighting its key decision points. A more detailed explanation of the actual ESI algorithm is given later in the chapter (see Figure 3-1a). The algorithm involves four decision points (A, B, C, and D) to categorize patients into one of five triage levels (refer to Figure 3-1). With experience, the triage nurse will be able to quickly progress through each ESI decision point.

##### Decision Point A: Is the Patient Dying?

In simple terms, at decision point A (Figure 3-2), the triage nurse determines whether the patient is dying. If the response is “yes,” the triage process ends there, and the patient is immediately assigned to ESI level 1. If the answer is “no,” the process continues to the next step in the algorithm, decision point B.

This question helps assess if the patient is at risk of imminent death (conceptual algorithm): Does the patient need urgent life-saving measures? The questions below assist in evaluating whether the patient fulfills level-1 criteria:

Does the patient need urgent airway management, medication, or other hemodynamic support?

Does the patient exhibit any of the following: current intubation, absence of breathing, lack of pulse, significant respiratory distress, oxygen saturation below 90 percent, sudden changes in mental status, or unresponsiveness?

Studies have shown that triage nurses can reliably anticipate when immediate interventions are necessary (Tanabe et al., in press). For ESI triage, Table 3-1 outlines which interventions are classified as life-saving and which are not.

Interventions that are not classified as life-saving may involve diagnostic or therapeutic actions, but do not directly “save a life.” Life-saving interventions focus on ensuring an open airway, sustaining breathing, or supporting circulation. The following questions may assist in assessing if the patient needs a life-saving intervention.

Is this patient's airway open and unobstructed?

Is the patient showing signs of breathing?

Is the patient exhibiting a pulse?

Is the nurse worried about the pulse’s rate, rhythm, and strength?

Was this patient intubated before arriving at the hospital due to worries about their capacity to keep their airway open, breathe on their own, or sustain adequate oxygen levels?

Is the nurse worried about whether this patient can supply enough oxygen to their tissues?

An ESI level-1 patient arrives at the emergency department in a critical, unstable state. Immediate intervention is essential to prevent death, prompting a team response with the physician present at the bedside and nurses delivering intensive care. These patients receive immediate attention, as prompt treatment can influence their risk of complications or death.

A primary distinction between ESI level-1 and level-2 patients is the necessity for immediate physician involvement in patient care. Level-1 patients are in critical condition and need prompt evaluation and intervention by a physician. In contrast, although level-2 patients are also seriously ill, emergency nurses can begin treatment using established protocols without a physician present. The nurse understands that interventions are required but is assured that the patient’s condition is stable enough not to worsen rapidly. The nurse can start intravenous lines, provide supplemental oxygen, perform an ECG, and connect the patient to a cardiac monitor before a physician is required at the bedside.

When assessing the necessity for urgent lifesaving measures, the triage nurse thoroughly examines the patient’s respiratory condition and oxygen saturation (SpO2) levels. Even if a patient is still breathing, severe respiratory distress or an SpO2 below 90 percent signals the need for prompt action to secure the airway and ensure adequate oxygenation. Such patients require the immediate presence of a physician to administer medications for rapid sequence intubation or to initiate other airway and breathing interventions.

Patients experiencing chest pain should also be assessed according to the same standards. Some individuals with chest pain are quite stable and, while they may need a diagnostic ECG, they do not qualify for level-1 criteria. In contrast, those who appear pale, sweaty, are in acute respiratory distress, or have unstable vital signs will need urgent, life-saving treatment and do fulfill level-1 criteria. Every patient with chest pain must be evaluated in relation to the level-1 criteria to decide if immediate life-saving intervention is necessary.

When deciding if a patient needs immediate life-saving care, the triage nurse must evaluate the patient’s level of consciousness. The ESI algorithm utilizes the AVPU scale (alert, verbal, pain, unresponsive) as shown in Table 3-2. This step aims to identify patients experiencing a sudden change in consciousness. The nurse should look for deviations from the patient’s baseline, with particular concern for those who were previously alert but are now categorized as P (pain) or U (unresponsive). Unresponsiveness should be considered in the context of sudden neurological changes, and not in patients with pre-existing developmental delays, documented dementia, or aphasia. Any patient who is unresponsive—including those who are intoxicated and do not respond to painful stimuli—meets level-1 criteria and requires immediate assessment. For instance, a patient with a sudden decrease in mental status who cannot maintain their airway or is experiencing severe respiratory distress would need urgent intervention.

Users familiar with ESI version 3 (v. 3) will observe a significant modification in the ESI level-1 criteria. The primary distinction between ESI v. 3 and ESI version 4 (v. 4) is the recognition and reclassification of some of the most critically ill patients, who were previously categorized as ESI level 2. Now, patients who need immediate life-saving interventions are assigned to ESI level 1. For example, under the previous version, a patient experiencing severe respiratory distress who required intubation but was still breathing would have been placed in ESI level 2. In the new version, this patient now qualifies for level 1. Additional examples of patients now considered ESI level 1 include those who are weak and dizzy with a heart rate of 30 or 200. While this adjustment may not impact a large number of patients, it ensures that the most critically ill are classified correctly. Before v. 4, triage nurses often faced two types of ESI level-2 patients: those needing immediate attention and those who could safely wait a short period (about 10 minutes) without worsening. This issue prompted a large, multi-center, prospective study to determine which ESI level-2 patients actually received immediate interventions (Tanabe et al., in press). The findings from that study led to the revision of the ESI system. This updated ESI handbook outlines these changes and introduces ESI v. 4.

An ESI level-1 patient does not necessarily arrive at the emergency department by ambulance. Individuals with drug overdoses or acute alcohol intoxication might be left at the entrance, while children could be brought in by car and carried inside. An experienced triage nurse can quickly recognize these critically ill patients. With a swift, visual assessment from a distance, the nurse identifies those in severe distress. These patients are promptly moved to the treatment area, where resuscitation begins immediately.

Patients classified as ESI level 1 make up about 1 to 3 percent of all emergency department cases (Eitel et al., 2003; Wuerz, Milne, Eitel, Travers & Gilboy, 2000; Wuerz et al., 2001). These patients require immediate resuscitation by either the emergency physician and nurse or the trauma or code team upon arrival. Research on ESI indicates that the majority of ESI level-1 patients are admitted to intensive care units, while some die in the emergency department (Eitel et al., 2003; Wuerz, 2001). A small number of ESI level-1 patients are discharged from the ED if their altered level of consciousness or vital functions are reversible, such as in cases of hypoglycemia, seizures, alcohol intoxication, or anaphylaxis.

Illustrations of ESI level 1:

Heart stoppage.

Cessation of breathing.

Acute difficulty breathing.

Oxygen saturation below 90%.

Severely injured trauma patient arriving in an unresponsive state.

Overdose presenting with a respiratory rate of 6.

Three general questions are utilized to assess if the patient satisfies level-2 criteria.

Is this considered a high-risk scenario?

2. Does the patient exhibit confusion, lethargy, or disorientation?

3. Is the patient experiencing significant pain or discomfort?

The triage nurse gathers relevant subjective and objective data to promptly address these questions. An overview of ESI level-2 criteria is provided here, with a more comprehensive discussion of patients qualifying for ESI level-2 to be covered in Chapter 4.

Severe breathing difficulty accompanied by agonal or gasping respirations.

Markedly slow or fast heart rate accompanied by evidence of inadequate tissue perfusion.

Low blood pressure accompanied by symptoms of inadequate tissue perfusion.

A trauma patient in need of urgent resuscitation with crystalloids and colloids.

Experiencing chest pain, appearing pale and sweaty, with a blood pressure of 70 by palpation.

Feeling faint and lightheaded, heart rate is 30.

Severe allergic response.

Infant exhibiting limpness.

Unconscious with a strong smell of alcohol.

Low blood sugar accompanied by altered mental state.

##### Decision Point B: Should the Patient Wait?

After the triage nurse establishes that the patient does not qualify for ESI level 1, they proceed to decision point B (refer to Figure 33). At this stage, the nurse must determine if the patient can safely wait to be evaluated. If waiting is not appropriate, the patient is assigned ESI level 2. If the patient can wait, the process continues to the following step in the algorithm.

###### Is This a High-risk Situation?

Drawing on a brief patient interview, general observations, and the intuition developed through experience, the triage nurse identifies patients at high risk. Often, factors such as the patient’s age and medical history play a role in this assessment. A high-risk patient is someone whose condition could quickly worsen or who shows symptoms indicating a need for urgent, time-sensitive care. This type of patient may face a significant threat to life or organ function. In most cases, a comprehensive physical exam or a complete set of vital signs is not necessary to recognize high risk. Instead, the patient may describe symptoms that an experienced triage nurse immediately recognizes as serious. For instance, if a patient says, “I never get headaches and after lifting something heavy, I now have the worst headache of my life,” the triage nurse would assign an ESI level 2, as these symptoms could indicate a subarachnoid hemorrhage.

If a patient is classified as ESI level 2, the triage nurse has determined that it is not safe for them to wait in the waiting area for any period of time. Although ESI guidelines do not specify exact time frames, patients at ESI level 2 are a high priority and should typically be placed and begin receiving treatment within 10 minutes of their arrival. It is crucial to note that even though the criteria for level 1 have broadened in version 4 of the algorithm, ESI level-2 patients are still regarded as very ill and at significant risk. Immediate care is necessary, and a suitable bed must be located right away. In most cases, instead of moving on to the next patient, the triage nurse recognizes the severity of the situation and promptly notifies the charge nurse or staff in the patient care area that an ESI level 2 patient requires urgent attention.

Instances of high-risk scenarios:

Experiencing ongoing chest pain suggestive of coronary syndrome, but currently stable and not in need of urgent life-saving treatment.

A healthcare worker experiences a needlestick injury.

Shows symptoms of a stroke, but does not fulfill level-1 requirements.

Ectopic pregnancy needs to be excluded; patient is hemodynamically stable.

A patient undergoing chemotherapy, and thus immunosuppressed, presenting with a fever.

A patient exhibiting suicidal or homicidal tendencies.

Chapter 4 provides further details about high-risk situations.

###### Is the Patient Confused, Lethargic, or Disoriented?

This is the second question to consider at decision point B. Once more, the focus is on determining if the patient is showing a sudden change in consciousness. Patients who are normally confused do not qualify for level-2 criteria.

Confused: Shows unsuitable reactions to stimuli, with reduced attention span and impaired memory.

Lethargic: Sleepy, spends more time sleeping than normal, but reacts properly when prompted.

Disoriented: The patient cannot accurately respond to questions regarding time, location, or identity.

Instances of patients exhibiting confusion, lethargy, or disorientation:

Recent development of confusion in an older patient.

The mother reports that her 3-month-old baby is sleeping constantly.

The teenager was discovered in a state of confusion and disorientation.

All of these examples suggest that the brain could be impaired either in its structure or its chemistry.

###### Is This Patient in Severe Pain or Distress?

At decision point B, the triage nurse’s third question is whether the patient is experiencing pain or distress. If the answer is “no,” the nurse proceeds to the next step in the process. If the answer is “yes,” the nurse must evaluate the severity of the pain or distress. This assessment is based on clinical observation and/or the patient’s self-reported pain score of 7 or above on a 0 to 10 scale. When a patient reports pain at 7/10 or higher, the nurse may assign an ESI level 2, but it is not mandatory. Pain is a frequent reason for emergency department visits, and not all patients with pain scores of 7/10 or more require an ESI level-2 designation. For instance, a patient with a sprained ankle and pain rated at 8/10 would typically be classified as ESI level 4. Assigning a level 2 rating based solely on pain is not necessary in such cases.

In certain patients, pain can be evaluated through clinical observation, such as noting distressed facial expressions, sweating, body posture, and alterations in vital signs. The triage nurse looks for physical signs of acute pain that validate the patient’s reported pain level. For instance, a patient with abdominal pain who is sweating, has a rapid heart rate, and elevated blood pressure, or a patient experiencing severe flank pain accompanied by vomiting, pale skin, and a history of kidney stones, are both clear examples of individuals who qualify for ESI level-2. More details about ESI level 2 and pain assessment can be found in Chapter 4.

Severe distress may be either physical or mental. Instances of distress include a victim of sexual assault, an aggressive patient, or a person with bipolar disorder experiencing a manic episode.

ESI level-2 patients represent a relatively small but high-risk segment, making up 20 to 30 percent of emergency department visits (Travers et al., 2002; Wuerz et al., 2001; Tanabe, Gimbel et al., 2004). After identifying an ESI level-2 patient, the triage nurse must ensure prompt care. Registration can be handled by a family member or completed at the bedside. These patients require vital signs and a thorough nursing assessment, though this does not have to occur during triage. Patient placement should not be postponed to complete vital sign collection. Studies on ESI indicate that 50 to 60 percent of ESI level-2 patients are admitted from the emergency department (Wuerz et al., 2001).

##### Decision Point C: Resource Needs

If the answers to the first two decision points are “no,” the triage nurse proceeds to decision point C (refer to Figure 3-4). At this stage, the nurse should ask, “How many different resources will this patient likely require for the physician to make a disposition decision?” The possible dispositions include discharging the patient home, admitting them to the observation unit or hospital, or transferring them to another facility. This step again relies on the triage nurse’s previous experience with similar emergency department cases. It is important for ED nurses to recognize that estimating resource needs is based on standards of care and is not influenced by the hospital’s type (teaching or non-teaching) or its location. Any patient presenting to an emergency department should generally require the same resources to reach a disposition. Taking into account the patient’s brief subjective and objective evaluation, medical history, allergies, medications, age, and gender, the nurse must determine how many resources will be used for the physician to decide on a disposition. Essentially, what is the usual protocol for a patient presenting with this common complaint? The triage nurse should make this judgment based on their assessment and the standard practices of the specific ED, rather than on individual provider preferences.

To determine what resources are needed, the triage nurse should understand the standards of care in the emergency department. The nurse must also be aware of the idea of “prudent and customary.” An effective way to approach this is to consider, “Based on this patient’s main complaint or injury, what resources will the emergency physician probably use?” Resources may include hospital services, diagnostic tests, procedures, consultations, or interventions that go beyond the physician’s history and physical exam, as well as basic emergency department actions like applying a bandage. Additional details and examples can be found in Chapter 5.

Table 3-3 outlines which items are classified as resources and which are not for ESI triage purposes. Patients at ESI level 3 are expected to need two or more resources, those at ESI level 4 are anticipated to need one resource, and ESI level 5 patients are expected to need none, as shown in Table 3-4.

Studies indicate that ESI level-3 patients account for 30% to 40% of those treated in the emergency department (Eitel et al., 2003; Wuerz et al., 2001). These individuals typically need more comprehensive assessments but are considered stable in the short term, which can result in longer ED stays. ESI level 4 and 5 patients represent 20% to 35% of emergency department visits, and this percentage may be higher in areas with limited access to primary care. Properly trained mid-level providers with suitable skill sets could manage these patients in fast-track or express care units, especially since many present with trauma-related issues. Given their stable condition, it is safe for these patients to wait several hours before being seen.

##### Decision Point D:The Patient's Vital Signs

Prior to assigning a patient to ESI level 3, the nurse must review the patient’s vital signs to determine if they fall outside the normal range for the patient’s age and if these abnormalities are clinically significant. If the vital signs are abnormal, the triage nurse should consider elevating the triage level to ESI level 2. Ultimately, it is up to the triage nurse to decide whether the patient should be upgraded to ESI level 2 due to abnormal vital signs. This is referred to as decision point D.

Vital sign parameters vary by age (refer to Figure 3-5). The vital signs considered include pulse, respiratory rate, and oxygen saturation, with body temperature also assessed in children under three years old. Based on these criteria, a triage nurse may choose to upgrade an adult patient with a heart rate of 104, or keep them at ESI level 3. Similarly, a 6-month-old infant with a cold and a respiratory rate of 48 might be assigned to ESI level 2 or 3. The nurse must determine, using the patient’s history and physical exam, whether the vital signs indicate a high enough risk that the patient should not wait to be evaluated. Chapter 6 provides a detailed discussion of vital signs and includes examples.

Temperature is considered only for children younger than three years old. A high fever may prevent young children from being placed in categories 4 and 5. This approach helps to identify children who may have bacteremia and ensures they are not directed to a fast track area or made to wait for an extended period. Detailed pediatric fever guidelines will be provided in Chapter 6.

###### Does Time to Treatment Influence ESI Triage Categories?

Estimating how long a patient can wait before being seen by a doctor is a key part of most triage systems. The Australasian and Canadian Triage Systems specify that patients must be evaluated by a physician within a set timeframe according to their triage level. In contrast, the ESI does not set strict time requirements for physician assessment. Nonetheless, patients classified as ESI level 2 should receive prompt attention, though the exact timing is determined by each institution’s policy. Often, there is confusion between institutional policies, the actual process of patient care, and the ESI triage level.

We will present four patient cases where there may appear to be a contradiction between patient flow and triage category. Trauma patients often arrive at triage after experiencing a significant injury mechanism, such as being an unrestrained passenger in a high-speed car accident. Sometimes, these patients do not arrive by ambulance but instead come to triage on their own, reporting localized right upper quadrant pain and having stable vital signs. Although this patient is physiologically stable, walked into the emergency department, and does not meet the criteria for ESI level 1, they are still at high risk for injuries like a liver laceration and other serious trauma, so they should be assigned ESI level 2. Many emergency departments have trauma protocols and trauma response levels that require prompt initiation of care. Both triage level and trauma response level are important and should be documented as separate scores. While the triage nurse correctly identifies this as a physiologically stable trauma patient and assigns ESI level 2, she should also ensure the patient is placed and managed according to trauma policy. The patient is likely stable for at least another 10 minutes and does not need immediate life-saving measures. However, if the same patient arrived with a palpable blood pressure of 80, they would be classified as ESI level 1 and would need urgent, life-saving hemodynamic interventions.

Another instance of policies influencing triage levels involves patients presenting with stable chest pain. If a patient is physiologically stable but has chest pain that could indicate an acute coronary syndrome, they qualify for ESI level-2. These patients do not need immediate life-saving measures but are considered high-risk and require prompt attention. An ECG should be completed within 10 minutes of arrival, and many emergency departments have protocols to ensure rapid ECG initiation. Although care for these patients should begin quickly, the ECG itself is a diagnostic tool, not a life-saving intervention. If all patients with chest pain were assigned ESI level-1, it would make it challenging to prioritize those who truly need immediate life-saving care. However, a chest pain patient who arrives at triage sweating and with a palpable blood pressure of 80 would meet ESI level-1 criteria.

The third instance of urgent care involves patients showing symptoms of an acute stroke. If the patient is physiologically stable, a delay of 10 minutes before starting treatment is unlikely to worsen their condition. However, a stroke patient who cannot maintain their airway qualifies for ESI level 1.

In another scenario, an elderly patient who has fallen and may have a hip fracture arrives with family by private car and is experiencing significant pain. Although the patient does not strictly qualify for ESI level 2, they are clearly uncomfortable. The triage nurse would assign an ESI level 3 and likely prioritize placing the patient in a bed ahead of other ESI level 3 patients. Similar situations can occur with patients arriving by ambulance. However, arriving by ambulance alone does not justify assigning ESI level 1 or 2. Triage level should always be determined using ESI criteria, regardless of how the patient arrived.

Overall, care for ESI level-2 patients should be expedited, with the goal of placing them in the treatment area within 10 minutes. It is crucial to note that although ESI version 4 has broadened level-1 criteria to include patients needing immediate interventions who were previously classified as level 2, all level-2 patients remain potentially very ill and need prompt assessment and care. The triage nurse has determined that it is unsafe for these patients to wait. While they may appear stable at present, their condition could quickly worsen, and timely diagnostic or therapeutic interventions may be critical (for example, stable chest pain requires an ECG within 10 minutes of arrival), or they may face a possible major threat to life or organ function. ESI level-2 patients are still regarded as very high risk.

Given the current issue of ED overcrowding, it is common for triage nurses to encounter multiple ESI level-2 patients when there are no available ED beds. In these circumstances, there may be a temptation to “undertriage,” which can result in significant harm to patients and inaccurately reflect the ED’s patient population. When several ESI level-2 patients arrive at the same time, the triage nurse should assess each one using the ESI algorithm. This allows the nurse to prioritize among the level-2 patients, identifying those at greatest risk and arranging patient placement accordingly.

##### Summary

In conclusion, the ESI is a straightforward five-level triage system that categorizes patients according to the severity of their condition and the resources they require. The ESI triage process relies on four main decision points. With this system, an experienced emergency department nurse can quickly and accurately assess and triage patients.

### Chapter 4. ESI Level 2

This chapter builds upon the initial overview of the ESI, emphasizing the importance of the seasoned ED nurse’s clinical judgment. The ESI triage training program should allocate significant time to clarifying which patients qualify for ESI level 2. Here, we focus on typical patient scenarios that fulfill the criteria for ESI level 2.

Once the triage nurse has established that the patient does not need urgent, life-saving care, the next step is to assess whether the patient can wait. In making this judgment, the triage nurse should ask, “Would I allocate my last available bed to this patient?” The three questions outlined in Figure 4-1 must be addressed, as they are essential elements of the ESI level-2 criteria.

Is this considered a high-risk scenario?

Is the patient showing signs of recent confusion, drowsiness, or disorientation?

3. Is the patient in significant pain or discomfort?

The rest of this chapter explores the decision-making aspects of ESI level 2 in depth. Numerous examples are included, illustrating potential medical diagnoses linked to patients’ chief complaints and symptoms. An experienced triage nurse will always evaluate the patient’s main complaint, observed signs and symptoms, demographic information, and medical history to help identify high-risk situations. Although the goal of nurse triage is not to establish a medical diagnosis, these scenarios rely on the triage nurse’s expertise regarding possible diagnoses related to specific complaints. Comprehensive resources on the signs and symptoms of various medical conditions include the Emergency Nursing Core Curriculum[©] and other emergency nursing reference books. The following section highlights selected examples of high-risk situations, though it is not meant to be all-inclusive. These examples are summarized in Table 4-1.

##### High-risk Situations

Recognizing high-risk situations is essential in the triage decision-making process, no matter which triage system is applied. The ESI emphasizes the significance of identifying high-risk cases and relies on the triage nurse’s knowledge and experience to determine which patients are at elevated risk.

There is limited literature on how emergency department (ED) triage nurses make decisions. While knowledge and experience are essential, they are not enough on their own. Another crucial element is intuition or a “sixth sense.” Novice triage nurses should be taught practical guidelines, or rules of thumb, to rely on until they gain the confidence and experience needed for quick, accurate decision-making. Examples of such guidelines include “assume all women of childbearing age are pregnant until proven otherwise” or “consider all chest pain as cardiac in origin until proven otherwise.” New triage nurses are also instructed in recognizing symptom clusters, such as the cardiac cluster of chest pain, nausea, shortness of breath, and sweating. Through previous clinical experiences, ED nurses develop what are known as clinical portraits—memories of specific patient cases they have encountered. For instance, a nurse will always recall a patient with fever, stiff neck, and a meningococcal rash when seeing a similar case in triage. With each triage situation, nurses must draw upon all their knowledge and experience. Experienced triage nurses should be able to easily recognize high-risk situations.

Vital signs alone are often insufficient for identifying patients at high risk. Patients usually arrive at the emergency department with a main complaint, symptoms, or a history that points to a potentially serious issue that can quickly worsen if not addressed immediately. Factors such as the patient’s age, medical history, and current medications often affect how severe the main complaint appears. For instance, an elderly, frail individual with intense abdominal pain faces a much greater risk of complications and death compared to a healthy 20-year-old. The older patient with abdominal pain should be assigned an ESI level 2, while the younger adult with stable vital signs is typically given an ESI level 3. Triage nurses frequently recognize high-risk cases, which may then be supported by abnormal vital signs. For example, a patient reporting fever and a productive cough might have a respiratory rate of 32 and an oxygen saturation of 90 percent. An experienced triage nurse can use their knowledge to determine that this patient likely has pneumonia, is at risk for further oxygen desaturation, and is therefore high risk. In contrast, less experienced emergency department nurses may lack the skills to reliably identify high-risk situations and make correct triage decisions. As a result, an inexperienced triage nurse can be a liability, regardless of the triage system in place. They have not yet developed the ability to use symptom patterns, clinical scenarios, or intuition—essential tools for recognizing high-risk patients. The following section will outline specific examples of high-risk situations.

###### Abdominal and Gastrointestinal

Abdominal pain is a common reason for visits to the emergency department. What factors make it high risk? Taking a thorough history and evaluating the current pain level, respiratory rate, and heart rate are key components that help identify high-risk cases. Pain severity is just one aspect to consider. If severe abdominal pain is accompanied by tachycardia or respiratory distress, this may indicate shock and puts the patient at higher risk. Elderly patients with severe abdominal pain are also at increased risk, as they are more likely to suffer from bowel obstructions, gastrointestinal bleeding, and other abdominal issues that carry greater morbidity and mortality compared to younger individuals. It is crucial to look for signs and symptoms of an acute abdomen in all patients presenting with abdominal pain. Important questions include: How long has the pain been present? What prompted the patient to seek emergency care today? Has the patient experienced significant nausea, vomiting, or diarrhea? Is there evidence of dehydration? Patients who report severe, “tearing” abdominal pain that radiates to the back should be evaluated for a possible abdominal aortic aneurysm. This pain is typically described as intense, constant, and of sudden onset, and these patients may have a history of hypertension.

Patients presenting with abdominal pain are frequently assigned an ESI level 3 at the start of the triage assessment, but if tachycardia or additional risk factors are identified, the triage nurse may reassess and classify the patient as high risk.

Vomiting blood or presenting with blood per rectum requires careful assessment, taking vital signs into account. A 30-year-old with bright red rectal bleeding, stable vital signs, and no additional risk factors does not qualify for ESI level 2. However, an elderly individual who called emergency services due to vomiting blood and has a heart rate of 117 and a respiratory rate of 24 is considered high risk and does meet the criteria for ESI level 2.

###### Cardiovascular

Chest pain is a frequent reason for seeking medical care. The symptoms of acute coronary syndromes (ACS) can be nonspecific, making it challenging to assess ACS risk during triage. Patients experiencing chest or epigastric discomfort, whether or not they have additional symptoms, generally require a prompt ECG to evaluate for ACS and should be considered high risk—classified as ESI level 2. Triage nurses must be aware of how heart disease can present differently, especially in women. For instance, a 54-year-old obese woman presenting to the emergency department with epigastric pain and fatigue is at risk for ACS and should be assigned to ESI level 2 as high risk. Patients with chest pain who are unstable and need immediate interventions like intubation or hemodynamic support should be triaged as ESI level 1. Not all patients with chest pain fall into level 1 or 2 categories; for example, a healthy 20-year-old with chest pain, cough, and a fever of 101°F is at low risk for ACS and does not meet ESI level 1 or 2 criteria. Each case should be evaluated individually. Other high-risk cardiovascular conditions include possible hypertensive emergencies, acute arterial occlusions, and patients presenting with fever after valve replacement surgery.

###### Dental, Ear, Nose, and Throat

While less frequent, epiglottitis still occurs and poses a potential threat to the airway. Peritonsillar abscess is another condition that can compromise the airway, and both are considered high-risk situations. If a patient with either condition is at immediate risk of airway obstruction and needs urgent intervention, they meet level-1 criteria. For patients presenting with epistaxis, the triage nurse should check blood pressure, even though this step is not included in the ESI algorithm. Causes of epistaxis may include a posterior nosebleed from a hypertensive crisis, nose picking in a patient taking Coumadin®, or recent cocaine use. Regardless of the cause, these patients should be assigned ESI level 2, as they are considered high-risk.

###### Environmental

Individuals with inhalation injuries are at elevated risk for airway obstruction. If a patient exhibits marked airway distress necessitating urgent intervention, they fulfill level-1 criteria.

###### Facial

Individuals who have sustained facial trauma need to be assessed for potential facial fractures. Such fractures frequently occur alongside other serious injuries and can result in airway obstruction, making them high-risk cases that require urgent attention. If facial trauma has already caused airway compromise, the patient should be assigned an ESI level 1 to ensure immediate airway intervention. Cases with a significant risk of airway compromise should be classified as ESI level 2.

###### General Medical

A number of other general medical issues should be evaluated for potential high-risk scenarios. These complications include diabetic ketoacidosis, abnormal blood sugar levels (either high or low), sepsis, episodes of fainting or near-fainting, and various electrolyte imbalances that may require urgent intervention. Hyperkalemia, in particular, poses a significant risk as it can cause dangerous heart rhythm disturbances. This condition should be considered in dialysis patients who present with weakness. Additionally, cancer patients receiving chemotherapy who develop a fever are at increased risk for sepsis and must be recognized as high risk and assessed promptly.

###### Genitourinary

Men experiencing testicular torsion typically report intense pain, are readily identifiable, and need prompt assessment, surgical treatment, and immediate pain management. Patients on renal dialysis who are unable to finish their treatment also represent a high-risk genitourinary emergency due to the potential for multiple electrolyte imbalances. Both women and, more frequently, men may arrive at triage with sudden urinary retention. Men over 65 often present with benign prostatic hypertrophy leading to an inability to urinate. Both genders may also experience postoperative urinary retention. These individuals are in significant distress and require urgent urinary catheterization. Such cases involve patients in severe discomfort who should be assigned an ESI level 2.

###### Mental Health

Patients presenting with mental health issues are considered high risk if they pose a threat to themselves, others, or their surroundings. Individuals who are suicidal, homicidal, psychotic, violent, or at risk of fleeing should be classified as high risk. Intoxication alone, without evidence of trauma or risk of aspiration, does not qualify as high risk. However, intoxicated patients should be thoroughly evaluated for trauma or behavioral concerns linked to alcohol use or their medical history. If either is present, the situation may be high risk, and the patient should be assigned an ESI level 2.

###### Neurological

Patients experiencing severe headaches along with changes in mental status, elevated blood pressure, lethargy, fever, or rash should be regarded as high risk. Additionally, any individual who suddenly develops speech difficulties or motor weakness should be categorized as ESI level 2. These symptoms may indicate an acute stroke, making prompt assessment essential. The time elapsed since symptom onset is a key consideration in selecting treatment options, especially for fibrinolytic or other interventions. A patient without a prior history of headaches who arrives at the emergency department with a sudden headache should be considered at high risk for a subarachnoid hemorrhage. Such patients often recall the exact activity they were engaged in when the headache started, commonly after lifting, having a bowel movement, or during sexual activity.

###### Obstetrical and Gynecological

Women presenting with abdominal pain or vaginal bleeding should be thoroughly evaluated, and vital signs should be recorded unless there is an immediate life-threatening condition. For all women of reproductive age, it is essential to obtain a pregnancy history and determine the date of the last menstrual period. The triage nurse should look for symptoms of abruptio placentae and placenta previa in women who are in late pregnancy. In early pregnancy, assessment should focus on identifying signs of ectopic pregnancy and spontaneous abortion. Pregnant patients who are between 14 and 20 weeks gestation or further along should be promptly evaluated by a physician, following the specific guidelines of the institution. Postpartum women who report heavy vaginal bleeding should also receive urgent medical attention from a physician. Any woman, whether pregnant or postpartum, who exhibits significant hemodynamic instability and requires immediate life-saving measures should be classified as ESI level 1 during triage.

###### Ocular

Patients who experience eye trauma, sudden partial or complete vision loss, or chemical exposure to the eye are at significant risk for lasting eye damage and should be assigned to ESI level 2 triage. Visual loss can be caused by conditions such as central retinal artery occlusion, acute narrow-angle glaucoma, and retinal detachment. Eye injuries may lead to globe rupture or hyphema. Chemical exposures, especially from alkali substances, require prompt irrigation to minimize corneal injury. Each of these situations demands urgent assessment and intervention to avoid further harm or worsening of the condition. These cases fulfill the requirements for ESI level 2. Although immediate eye irrigation is crucial, it is not classified as a life-saving measure, so these patients do not qualify for ESI level 1.

###### Orthopedic

Patients exhibiting signs and symptoms of compartment syndrome face a significant risk of losing the affected limb and should be categorized as ESI level 2. Other orthopedic injuries considered high-risk include any limb injury with impaired neurovascular status, partial or complete amputations, or injuries resulting from mechanisms known to be high-risk, such as severe acceleration or deceleration. Patients suspected of having fractures of the pelvis, femur, or hip, as well as those with other limb dislocations, require thorough assessment and monitoring of vital signs, as these injuries can lead to substantial blood loss. If a patient is hemodynamically unstable and requires immediate life-saving intervention, they should be classified as ESI level 1.

###### Pediatrics

Triage nurses often feel uneasy when determining the acuity level for pediatric patients, particularly infants. Gathering a precise history from the caregiver and assessing the child’s activity are crucial steps. A child who cannot be comforted or who appears withdrawn may be at significant risk for severe illness. The situations below illustrate examples of high-risk conditions in children:

Convulsions.

Severe dehydration and sepsis.

A complication of diabetes characterized by high blood sugar, the presence of ketones, and acidosis.

Burns resulting from child abuse.

Injury to the head.

Overdoses or ingestion of vitamins, iron, or other substances.

An infant younger than 28 days old who has a temperature of 100.4° F (38° C) or higher.

###### Transplant

Patients who have undergone organ transplantation are typically unwell and classified as high risk. They may develop organ rejection, sepsis, or other complications. Individuals awaiting transplantation are also generally regarded as high risk.

###### Respiratory

Numerous respiratory issues can put patients at significant risk. Those experiencing mild to moderate distress should undergo further assessment of their respiratory rate and pulse oximetry to decide if they should be classified as ESI level 2. Patients exhibiting severe respiratory distress who need immediate lifesaving measures, such as intubation, qualify for level-1 categorization. A high-risk patient is someone who is currently breathing and oxygenating sufficiently but is in respiratory distress and at risk of rapid decline. Causes of respiratory distress may include asthma, pulmonary embolism, pleural effusion, pneumothorax, inhalation of toxic smoke, foreign body aspiration, or shortness of breath accompanied by chest pain.

###### Toxicological

The majority of patients presenting with an overdose require prompt assessment, as these cases are considered high risk. Identifying the specific substances ingested and the amounts involved is frequently challenging. If the overdose was intentional and the patient expresses suicidal thoughts, this also qualifies as a high-risk scenario. Patients who arrive without breathing or who need urgent lifesaving measures should be assigned an ESI level 1, while all other admitted overdose cases should be classified as ESI level 2.

###### Trauma

Patients who have experienced a traumatic event are often at significant risk for injury, even if no visible injuries are present. Any injury mechanism that carries a high risk should be classified as ESI level 2, unless the patient has unstable vital signs and needs immediate intervention, in which case they should be assigned ESI level 1. Serious injuries occur due to the transfer of mechanical or kinetic energy, typically from acceleration, deceleration, or both. Examples include motor vehicle and motorcycle accidents, falls, and gunshot or stab wounds, all of which involve blunt or penetrating trauma and require thorough assessment for possible severe injury. The triage nurse should gather information such as the patient’s age, any pre-existing medical conditions, environmental factors, the height of a fall or jump, the speed of the vehicle involved, any history of loss of consciousness, the site of a penetrating injury, and the type of weapon used. The nurse will use their understanding of biomechanics and injury mechanisms to evaluate the patient and determine if they meet ESI level 2 criteria. Gunshot wounds to the head, neck, chest, or groin generally necessitate trauma team involvement and immediate care, and should be triaged as ESI level 1.

###### Wound Management

What factors classify a wound as high risk? Is there ongoing, uncontrolled bleeding? Is there evidence of arterial bleeding? Does the injury involve a partial amputation? How did the wound occur, and does the cause put the patient at increased risk for additional traumatic issues? The majority of wounds do not qualify for ESI level 2. For example, a patient with a stab wound to the thigh that only affects the subcutaneous tissue, has controlled bleeding, and maintains good distal neurological status can be assigned to ESI level 4. However, any wound with uncontrolled bleeding that demands immediate, lifesaving action to stabilize the patient falls under level 1 criteria.

##### Confusion/Lethargy/ Disorientation

The second consideration when assessing if a patient qualifies for level-2 criteria is whether they are experiencing new confusion, lethargy, or disorientation. Changes in mental status are a common reason for seeking care. Patients with these symptoms are often brought to the emergency department by relatives, friends, or emergency personnel. At decision point B in the ESI algorithm, confusion, lethargy, or disorientation refers specifically to a recent or sudden change in consciousness. Ongoing dementia or chronic confusion does not satisfy the requirements for ESI level 2. Acute confusion, lethargy, or disorientation can result from several serious medical issues, such as stroke, transient ischemic attack, other brain structural abnormalities, metabolic or electrolyte disturbances like hypoglycemia or hyponatremia, and toxicological problems.

This part of the algorithm is typically straightforward and offers minimal room for misinterpretation. When a patient arrives at triage with an unknown medical history and is confused, lethargic, or disoriented, the triage nurse should presume these symptoms are new and assign the patient to ESI level 2. However, if the patient exhibits new confusion, lethargy, or disorientation and needs an immediate life-saving intervention as outlined earlier, they should be categorized as ESI level 1.

##### Severe Pain/Distress

The last consideration in deciding if the patient qualifies for level-2 is whether they are experiencing severe pain or distress. The patient must be evaluated for significant pain or distress. Any patient reporting a pain score of 7 out of 10 or higher should be evaluated for ESI level-2 criteria.

The word "considered" holds significant importance. It is ultimately the triage nurse’s judgment to decide if the combination of the patient’s clinical condition and pain score justifies assigning an ESI level 2. For instance, a patient whose toe was struck by a heavy metal object might report their pain as 10 out of 10. The patient could indeed have a fracture and be in intense pain, and may not have attempted any pain relief before arriving at the emergency department. In this scenario, the appropriate triage level would be ESI level 4, as only one resource—an x-ray—will be required. The triage nurse should provide comfort measures at triage, such as applying ice, elevating the foot, and administering pain medication if protocols allow, to help alleviate the pain. The nurse should accept the patient’s report of 10/10 pain and address it during triage. Nevertheless, this patient can safely wait to be seen, and it would not be appropriate to allocate the last available bed to them. In conclusion, the triage nurse evaluates not just the patient’s reported pain level, but also considers the main complaint, medical history, and the patient’s physical presentation when assigning a triage category. Patients for whom severe pain could justify an ESI level 2 rating include:

A patient experiencing severe (10/10) flank pain and visibly writhing during triage.

An 80-year-old woman experiencing generalized abdominal pain rated 7 out of 10, accompanied by intense nausea.

A 30-year-old individual experiencing an acute pain crisis due to sickle cell disease.

A cancer patient experiencing intense pain.

Any burn, whether full- or partial-thickness, that necessitates prompt pain management.

All emergency department patients should be evaluated for pain and asked to rate their pain using a tool like the visual analog scale. Many triage nurses feel uneasy about recording a patient’s pain score and then having the patient wait to be seen. It is crucial for triage nurses to recognize that a patient’s self-reported pain score is just one aspect of the overall pain assessment. For instance, triage nurses often encounter patients who appear comfortable—such as laughing, talking on the phone, or eating—yet claim their pain is 10 or higher. Triage nurses should assign an ESI level 2 if a patient reports a pain score of 7 out of 10 or more and the nurse’s subjective and objective evaluation indicates that the pain requires interventions beyond what can be provided during triage. In such cases, the triage nurse determines that it would not be appropriate for the patient to wait and assigns them to the last available bed.

Ultimately, when deciding if a patient qualifies for ESI level-2, the triage nurse needs to evaluate for severe distress, which can be either physiological or psychological. Beyond pain, patients with significant respiratory distress fulfill the physiological criteria for ESI level 2. Severe psychological distress may be seen in patients who are:

Deeply upset following a sexual assault.

Displaying disruptive behavior during triage.

Aggressive.

Individuals who have experienced domestic abuse.

Undergoing an intense response to grief.

These patients are typically prioritized by the triage nurse to be taken directly to the treatment area, allowing them to bypass the waiting room.

##### Summary

We have examined the essential elements and questions required to assess if a patient qualifies for ESI level-2. It is vital for the triage nurse to take these questions into account when evaluating every patient. Overlooking a high-risk scenario could lead to longer wait times and possibly adverse outcomes for the patient.

### Chapter 5. Expected Resource Needs

Historically, triage systems have relied exclusively on assessing the severity of a patient’s condition. In these systems, nurses determine an acuity level by judging how long a patient can safely wait before being evaluated by a healthcare provider. The Emergency Severity Index (ESI) introduces a different method by not only prioritizing who should be seen first, but also, for patients with lower acuity, estimating the resources that will likely be required to reach a patient’s disposition. This chapter provides background on the rationale for incorporating resource prediction into the ESI and explains what is considered a resource. It also presents examples of patients classified as ESI levels 3 to 5, along with the anticipated resources each will need.

Traditionally, comprehensive triage has served as the primary approach for assigning triage acuity in U.S. emergency departments (Emergency Nurses Association [ENA], 1997, pp. 3-10; Gilboy, Travers & Wuerz, 1999). These triage systems rely on the nurse’s evaluation of vital signs, both subjective and objective data, medical history, allergies, and current medications to determine the level of triage acuity.

Predicting resource needs is a key component of the ESI for patients categorized as ESI level 3, 4, or 5. It is essential to note that resource allocation is not considered for patients with high acuity, such as those at ESI level 1 or 2. Resource prediction sets the ESI apart from other triage systems that focus solely on acuity. When Drs. Wuerz and Eitel developed the ESI triage system, they incorporated resource utilization to provide additional information and enable more precise triage decisions. They believed that experienced emergency department (ED) triage nurses could anticipate the types and quantities of tests, treatments, and consultations a patient would require during their ED visit. This has been confirmed by recent studies on ESI implementation and validation, which have demonstrated that triage nurses can accurately predict the resource needs of ED patients (Eitel, Travers, Rosenau, Gilboy & Wuerz, 2003; Tanabe, Gimbel, Yarnold & Adams, 2004). One such study, conducted across seven EDs in diverse geographic locations, including both urban and rural settings as well as academic and community hospitals, found that nurses using the ESI correctly predicted the number of resources needed by ED patients 70 percent of the time. In other words, ESI classification by skilled triage nurses reliably forecasts at triage how many resources patients will need to reach ED disposition, and, more importantly, distinguishes between patients who will require low versus high resource intensity. This differentiation based on resource needs enables more efficient patient flow at ED presentation by directing patients into different operational pathways, allowing for parallel processing. Additionally, research has shown that ESI triage levels are associated with significant patient outcomes, such as admission and mortality rates (Eitel et al., 2003).

It is important to emphasize that resource prediction applies solely to patients who are less acutely ill. At decision points A and B in the ESI algorithm (Figure 5-1), the nurse determines if patients qualify for ESI levels 1 or 2 based exclusively on their acuity. In contrast, at decision point C, the nurse assigns ESI levels 3 through 5 by evaluating both the patient’s acuity and anticipated resource requirements. Therefore, the triage nurse takes resource needs into account only when the responses to decision points A and B are “no.”

To determine what resources an ED patient may require, the triage nurse should have a broad understanding of emergency department care standards and, more specifically, know what is considered reasonable and typical emergency care. One simple way to approach this is to consider, “Based on this patient’s main complaint, which resources are emergency providers most likely to use?”

The triage nurse relies on information gathered from a brief subjective and objective assessment, along with the patient’s medical history, current medications, age, and gender, to estimate how many resources the ED provider will require to make a decision about the patient’s care. For instance, a healthy teenager with a straightforward leg laceration and no significant medical background would likely need just one resource: suturing. Conversely, an elderly patient with several chronic conditions and no prior episodes of dizziness who arrives with a head laceration after a fall will obviously require multiple resources, such as suturing, laboratory tests, an ECG, imaging studies, or specialist consultations. Proper application of ESI triage depends on the nurse’s ability to anticipate resource needs, making it a task best suited for experienced emergency nurses. Overall, regardless of the triage system in place, we maintain that triage should be conducted by a skilled emergency nurse to ensure patient safety.

Table 5-1 (a repeat of Table 3-1) outlines the guidelines for classifying resources within the ESI triage system. The distinction between ESI levels 3, 4, and 5 is based on the nurse’s assessment of the number of resources a patient will require for disposition. According to the triage nurse’s judgment, patients anticipated to need no resources are assigned to level 5, those expected to need one resource are placed in level 4, and patients likely to require two or more resources are categorized as ESI level 3. Research has shown that patients needing two or more resources experience higher hospital admission and mortality rates, as well as longer emergency department stays (Eitel et al., 2003; Tanabe et al., 2004 Reliability and validity).

While Table 5-1 does not include every possible resource, it offers general direction regarding the types of diagnostic tests, procedures, and treatments that are considered resources within the ESI system. Emergency nurses using the ESI should avoid focusing too much on the specific definitions of each resource. The key point is that ESI only requires the triage nurse to estimate the resources a patient will likely need during their ED visit. Table 5-1 lists the most frequently used resources, but it is neither feasible nor necessary to list every potential ED resource. For accurate ESI assignment, it is sufficient to determine whether a patient will require no resources, one resource, or two or more resources. Once a triage nurse identifies two likely resources, further estimation is unnecessary. The main purpose of the ESI resource component is to distinguish patients with more complex, resource-intensive needs from those with simpler issues. For ESI triage, resources are defined as interventions that go beyond a basic exam or minor interventions by ED staff, or that involve personnel outside the ED. Resources that demand significant ED staff time (such as administering IV medications or inserting a chest tube) or require assistance from outside departments (like radiology for x-rays or surgical consultations) tend to increase the patient’s length of stay in the ED and reflect a higher level of patient complexity and triage priority.

There are frequently asked questions regarding what qualifies as an ESI resource. One common question concerns how many blood or urine tests and x-rays count as a resource. According to the ESI triage system, the triage nurse should consider the number of distinct types of resources required to decide the patient’s disposition, rather than counting each individual test.

A complete blood count (CBC) and an electrolyte panel together make up a single laboratory test resource.

A complete blood count and a chest x-ray are two types of resources (laboratory test and imaging).

A CBC and a urinalysis are both laboratory tests, and when performed together, they are considered a single resource.

A chest x-ray and standard skull radiographs are one type of resource (x-ray).

Cervical spine X-rays and a head CT scan are two imaging resources (X-ray and CT scan).

Another commonly debated resource is the use of a splint, which is not considered a resource. If it were, patients with ankle sprains would be classified as ESI level 3 (requiring an x-ray and splint). Although applying a splint can require significant effort, it’s important to remember that resource prediction is solely intended to categorize patients and ensure they are directed to the appropriate area of the emergency department. In many emergency departments, ESI level-3 patients are not suitable for fast track or urgent care sections. Triage scores do not reflect the overall intensity of nursing workload.

Another frequently asked question about ESI resources concerns the inclusion of eye irrigation as a resource. Patients who experience a chemical splash to the eye are typically classified as ESI level-2 due to the high-risk nature of their injury, so the need for eye irrigation does not influence their ESI level. On the other hand, if the eye issue is caused by dust particles, the patient is not automatically considered high risk. In such cases, eye irrigation is counted as a resource, placing the patient at ESI level-4. Performing an eye exam is not considered a resource since it is part of the standard physical examination. Additional questions about resources are answered in Chapter 5’s Frequently Asked Questions section in Appendix A.

Clinicians often ask about the items categorized as “not resources” in Table 5-1. This list is designed to help triage nurses efficiently and accurately assign patients to one of five clinically distinct levels (Wuerz, Milne, Eitel, Travers & Gilboy, 2000). Items considered not to be resources include physical examinations, point-of-care testing, and procedures that generally do not increase a patient’s length of stay in the emergency department or suggest greater complexity. Because it is standard practice for all ED patients to receive a basic history and physical exam, these assessments—including pelvic exams—are not counted as resources for ESI classification. The strength of the ESI lies in its straightforwardness; the main aim of identifying resources is to distinguish patients with more complex needs who require two or more resources (level 3 or higher) from those with less complicated issues who will likely need fewer than two resources (level 4 or 5). Emergency nurses should avoid overcomplicating the ESI by focusing too much on the specifics of resource definitions. In most cases, a patient will need either no resources, one resource, or two or more resources.

Although resource use can differ depending on the location, provider, or even the individual patient, triage nurses are encouraged to base their ESI resource predictions on the typical management of the most frequent presenting issues. Ideally, any patient arriving at an emergency department should require roughly the same resources. For instance, if a provider evaluates an 82-year-old nursing home resident with an indwelling urinary catheter who presents with fever and cough, it is likely that blood tests, urine tests, and a chest x-ray will be ordered. The triage nurse can reasonably anticipate that this patient will need two or more resources and should therefore assign an ESI level 3.

While there may be slight differences in procedures among various emergency departments, these usually do not significantly impact the triage rating. For instance, some departments perform pregnancy tests within the ED (which is not considered a resource by ESI), while others send the tests to the lab (which is considered a resource by ESI). However, it is uncommon for patients to require only a pregnancy test, as most will need at least one additional resource. One variation in ED practices that could lead to different ESI levels is how patients with a sole complaint of sore throat are managed. In some hospitals, it is standard to take throat cultures (counted as one resource, ESI level 4), whereas in others, this is not routinely done (no resources, ESI level 5). Another example of practice variation is the application of the Ottawa Ankle Rules, which are evidence-based guidelines to decide if an ankle x-ray is necessary for patients with ankle injuries. The extent to which these rules are used differs between institutions. Facilities that implement these rules during triage may order fewer x-rays compared to those that do not regularly use them.

Temperature is a key factor in evaluating the allocation of resources for infants and young children. This topic will be discussed in Chapter 6.

Clinically, patients classified as ESI level 4 and 5 can wait several hours before being seen by a provider. However, from a customer service perspective, these patients may be more appropriately managed in a fast-track or urgent care environment. Mid-level practitioners with the right skill set and supervision are capable of treating level-4 and 5 patients. The ESI system also offers an operational benefit, as level-5 patients can occasionally be accommodated for a quick assessment and disposition by a provider, even when the department is full. Frequently, triage policies specify that ESI level-4 or 5 patients may be directed to an urgent care or fast-track area.

In conclusion, the ESI introduces a novel method for emergency department triage by incorporating predictions regarding the number of resources required to determine patient disposition. For patients classified as ESI levels 3, 4, and 5, resource needs are factored into the triage level, whereas decisions for ESI levels 1 and 2 rely solely on the severity of the patient’s condition. Table 5-2 provides examples of patients in ESI levels 3, 4, and 5. In practice, estimating resource needs has proven highly useful for managing the large volume of patients presenting with non-acute issues.

### Chapter 6.The Role of Vital Signs in ESI Triage

##### Introduction Figure 6-1. Danger Zone Vital Signs

This chapter centers on decision point D, which involves evaluating the patient's vital signs. By this stage in the ESI algorithm, the triage nurse has already established that the patient does not qualify for ESI level 1 or 2 and will need two or more resources. Because the patient requires at least two resources, they are classified as at least ESI level 3. At this juncture, the nurse reviews the patient’s vital signs, including heart rate, respiratory rate, and oxygen saturation, and, for children under three, temperature when necessary. If any of the vital signs exceed the danger zone thresholds (as shown in decision point D, Figure 6-1), the nurse should seriously consider upgrading the patient’s triage level from 3 to 2.

In the ESI triage training program, significant time should be allocated to discussing how vital signs impact the decision to reclassify a patient from ESI level 3 to level 2. It is important to emphasize that the experienced triage nurse is ultimately responsible for determining if a patient qualifies for ESI level 2, taking into account the patient’s medical history, current medications, and both subjective and objective assessments, including overall appearance. This determination relies on the nurse’s clinical expertise and understanding of normal vital sign ranges for all age groups, as well as the effects of factors like medications, medical history, and pain levels.

##### What Are Vital Signs?

Vital signs are typically basic measurements of physiological functions such as temperature, blood pressure, pulse, respiratory rate, and pulse oximetry (refer to Table 6-1). These measurements often guide healthcare professionals in choosing a specific course of action. In recent years, nursing literature has increasingly highlighted the significance of pain, with the American Pain Society coining the term “Pain: the fifth vital sign” to raise awareness among healthcare providers about the need to assess and manage pain. Pain evaluation is a key part of the ESI and is actually considered earlier in its process. For ESI purposes, the vital sign parameters used at decision point D for children under three years old include heart rate, respiratory rate, oxygen saturation, and temperature. Vital signs provide objective information that helps determine a patient’s general health status and viability. The readings we collect shape our understanding of a patient’s overall condition and influence our diagnostic and treatment decisions. Nevertheless, vital signs alone do not offer a complete assessment of a patient’s state. They can be influenced by various factors, such as prescription drugs, herbal supplements, and recreational substances. For instance, beta-blockers can cause a slower heart rate and mask the typical rapid heart rate seen in shock. Elderly patients with hypothyroidism may present with low body temperature, even during severe infections like sepsis. Similarly, a young adult’s high temperature might be the result of recreational drug use.

Vital signs are fluctuating, dynamic markers that supplement a patient’s assessment. Their measurement can depend on the person taking them, and what is considered normal varies depending on the source referenced. Even in optimal circumstances, vital signs may not always be dependable or precise (Edmonds, Mower, Lovato & Lomeli, 2002). Often, the patient’s overall appearance and clinical context are most informative. Nevertheless, if a triage nurse believes that knowing a patient’s vital signs would assist in evaluating risk, then these measurements should be taken. For instance, if a patient is on immunosuppressive drugs, undergoing chemotherapy, or has an illness like AIDS that suppresses the immune system, it is important to check their body temperature.

##### Are Vital Signs Necessary at Triage?

Before the introduction of five-level triage in the United States, it was customary for every patient arriving at an emergency department to have their vital signs measured prior to being assigned a triage level. Vital signs were viewed as a crucial part of the initial nursing evaluation and frequently served as a basis for decision-making. In the traditional three-level triage system, vital signs played a key role in determining how long a patient could safely wait for care; if vital signs were normal, patients were often allowed to wait longer. As a result, vital signs historically carried significant weight in triage assessments, sometimes more so than the patient’s clinical presentation.

In recent years, updated triage models have recommended the selective use of vital signs during triage (Gilboy, Travers & Wuerz, 2000). Collecting initial vital signs is not a required part of other five-level triage systems and is generally not performed during the triage of level-1 or level-2 patients, who are the most critically ill. For instance, the Guidelines for Implementation of the Australasian Triage Scale in Emergency Departments specify that “vital signs should only be measured at triage if required to estimate urgency, or if time permits” (Australasian College for Emergency Medicine, 2000). Likewise, the Canadian Triage and Acuity Scale (CTAS) states that vital signs are only needed if they are essential for determining the triage level, particularly for levels 3, 4, and 5, and only if time allows (Beveridge et al., 2002). The Manchester Triage Group incorporates specific vital sign criteria as decision points within its flow chart, using these parameters as one of several factors to help the triage nurse determine the patient’s acuity level.

Vital signs are not always the best method for determining triage acuity. Some research indicates that taking vital signs may not be essential during the initial triage assessment. In 2002, Cooper, Flaherty, Lin, and Hubbell studied how vital signs influence triage status, also taking into account factors like age and communication skills. Their research involved 24 emergency departments across the United States and included over 14,000 patients. The study found that vital signs altered the triage acuity level in only 8% of cases. Among different age groups, children aged 2 years or younger experienced the greatest change in triage decisions, with an 11.4% shift after vital signs were obtained.

##### Vital Signs and ESI Triage

With ESI triage, the only mandatory situation for checking vital signs is for patients who do not initially qualify as ESI level 1 or 2, but are expected to require two or more resources. For patients assigned to ESI levels 1, 2, 4, or 5, taking vital signs at triage is optional and left to the triage nurse’s judgment. Although the ESI system does not mandate vital sign assessment for every patient at triage, individual institutions may have their own protocols. Hospital policies on vital sign assessment at triage are shaped by factors like staffing, patient mix, and available resources, which are not addressed in this handbook. Generally, it is always acceptable to take vital signs when triaging a stable patient. According to ESI, only level-3 patients require vital sign assessment. (Refer to Table 6-2)

The creators of the ESI and the current research team agree that experienced emergency department nurses can use vital sign information to supplement their clinical judgment when assigning ESI ratings to patients. However, there is limited evidence linking abnormal vital signs to emergency department acuity or confirming that these abnormalities reliably indicate serious illness. The ESI has been updated over time to incorporate new evidence and recommendations from the literature. Initially, the ESI working group relied on systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS) research (Rangel-Frausto et al., 1995) to develop the danger zone vital sign criteria and related footnotes. The first ESI version used SIRS criteria, such as a heart rate over 90 in adults, as a definitive reason to upgrade a patient from ESI level 3 to level 2 (Wuerz, Milne, Eitel, Traers & Gilboy, 2000). Since the SIRS studies focused on mortality predictors in intensive care unit patients, applying these criteria in the ED led to too many false positives at the initial ESI hospitals. As a result, the heart rate threshold was increased to 100 in ESI version 2, and nurses were advised to consider upgrading adult patients with heart rates above 100 to ESI level 2 (Wuerz et al., 2001; Gilboy, Tanabe, Travers, Eitel & Wuerz, 2003). Pediatric vital sign parameters were also incorporated into the danger zone vital signs criteria.

When applying the ESI triage system, it is not required to assess vital signs in the triage area for patients who are immediately assigned to level 1 or 2. If a patient appears unstable or has a primary complaint that demands urgent care, they should be quickly moved to the treatment area. In these cases, the resuscitation team will take and monitor vital signs at the bedside. This includes patients whose clinical presentation suggests a high risk or an immediate need for cardiovascular or respiratory support, such as those who look pale, sweaty, or cyanotic. Nevertheless, the triage nurse may choose to check vital signs in the triage area if there is no available bed or if they believe the information will help determine the correct triage level. Some patients may only be recognized as ESI level 1 after their vital signs are measured. For instance, an elderly patient who is awake and alert but complains of dizziness could be found to have a critical condition if their heart rate is discovered to be 32 or 180 during the assessment.

As outlined in the ESI algorithm in Chapter 3, when patients do not qualify for ESI level-1 or 2, the triage nurse proceeds to decision point C. At this stage, the nurse evaluates how many resources the patient is likely to require in the emergency department. If only one or no resources are anticipated, the patient can be categorized as ESI level 4 or 5, and a vital sign check is not needed. However, if two or more resources are expected, the nurse moves to decision point D, where vital signs should be measured. Vital signs are particularly significant for some patients during triage, especially those assigned to ESI level 3, as they can provide additional evidence of possible serious illness. If any vital signs fall within the danger zone, it is advised that the triage nurse consider upgrading the patient from level 3 to level 2.

The ESI triage system specifically includes heart rate, respiratory rate, and oxygen saturation (for patients who may have respiratory issues) as vital signs. Temperature is only considered for children younger than three years old. It is important to recognize that abnormal blood pressure is not part of the ESI triage criteria. However, this does not mean that triage nurses should avoid measuring blood pressure or temperature in older children or adults; rather, these measurements are not typically used to determine the correct triage acuity level.

##### Vital Signs and Pediatric Fever

In this edition of the ESI Handbook, version 4 (v.4) of the ESI algorithm has been revised to reflect updated pediatric fever guidelines. As illustrated in Figure 6-2, note D of the ESI algorithm covers pediatric fever criteria relevant to ESI triage. This portion includes guidance from the American College of Emergency Physicians’ Clinical Policy for Children Under Three Years Old Presenting to the Emergency Department With Fever (ACEP, 2003).

The ESI Triage Research Team advises that vital signs should be checked in patients younger than 3 years old during triage. Specifically, taking a temperature is crucial for all children from birth up to 36 months, and assessing vital signs is a key part of evaluating any infant under 36 months with a known fever (Baraff, 2000). This process helps distinguish between ESI level-2 and level-3 patients and reduces the chance that children who may have bacteremia are directed to express care or face an inappropriate delay. It is important to note that any patient who is in immediate danger or at high risk will be categorized as ESI level 1 or 2.

Table 6-3 offers guidance for triage nurses on using the ESI to evaluate febrile children and select the most suitable triage level. Fever is commonly defined as a rectal temperature above 38.0° C (100.4° F) (Baraff et al., 1993; ACEP, 2003). Infants younger than 28 days with a fever should be regarded as high risk and given at least an ESI level 2. For infants aged 28 days to 3 months, there are no definitive guidelines. The ESI research team advises triage nurses to follow their hospital’s local protocols. It is recommended that nurses consider assigning at least an ESI level 2 to these patients.

In version 4 of the ESI, we have adopted a different set of guidelines for managing fever in children aged 3 to 36 months. These guidelines focus on children with high fevers, defined as a temperature above 39.0° C (102.2° F) (ACEP, 2003). When evaluating a highly febrile child in this age group, the triage nurse should determine the child’s immunization status and whether there is a clear source for the fever. If the child is not fully immunized or if no source for the fever can be identified, the child should be categorized as at least ESI level 3. If the child’s immunizations are current and there is an identifiable cause for the fever, an ESI level of 4 or 5 is suitable. For instance, a 7-month-old who is under pediatric care, has received the Haemophilus influenza type b (HIB) vaccine, and presents with a fever while tugging at his ear could be assigned to ESI level 5.

##### Case Examples

The case studies below illustrate how vital signs information is utilized during ESI triage.

A healthy-appearing 28-year-old woman states, “My doctor said I’m approximately 6 weeks pregnant, and I believe I might be having a miscarriage.” She reports, “I began spotting this morning and am now experiencing cramping.” She has no allergies or past medical history and is taking prenatal vitamins. Her vital signs are: temperature 98°F, heart rate 112, respiratory rate 22, and blood pressure 90/60.

This patient qualifies for an upgrade from level 3 to level 2 triage due to her vital signs. Her elevated heart rate and respiratory rate, along with low blood pressure, are worrisome. These symptoms may suggest internal hemorrhage caused by a ruptured ectopic pregnancy.

The mother of a 15-month-old reports that her baby has been experiencing diarrhea since the previous day. She mentions that everyone in the family has recently had the gastrointestinal virus that is circulating. The baby has shown reduced appetite, a mild fever, and several episodes of watery stools. The child is calmly sitting on the mother’s lap. The triage nurse observes indications of dehydration. There is no past medical history, no known drug allergies, and the baby is not on any medications. Vital signs are: temperature 100.4°F, heart rate 142, respiratory rate 48, and blood pressure 76/50.

This patient qualifies for at least ESI level 3. He will need laboratory tests and intravenous fluids as resources. Given his vital signs, the triage nurse may upgrade him to ESI level 2. For an infant of this age, both heart rate and respiratory rate fall outside the normal range.

A 57-year-old woman states, “I need to see a doctor about my cough. I can’t seem to get rid of it. I barely slept last night because I was coughing so much, and now I’m extremely tired.” She mentions having a fever of 101° last night and is producing yellow sputum when she coughs. Her medical history includes a hysterectomy three years ago; she is not on any medications but is allergic to penicillin. Her vital signs are: temperature 101.4°, respiratory rate 28, heart rate 100, and oxygen saturation 90 percent.

At the start of her triage evaluation, this patient appears to possibly have pneumonia. She is likely to require at least two resources, but her decreased oxygen saturation and elevated respiratory rate are worrisome. Based on her vital signs, the triage nurse should upgrade her to an ESI level 2.

A 34-year-old obese woman arrives at triage with complaints of diffuse abdominal pain rated 6 out of 10, ongoing for the past two days. She reports multiple episodes of vomiting and notes that her last bowel movement was three days ago. Her medical history includes back surgery; she is not on any medications and has a peanut allergy. Her vital signs are: temperature 97.8°F, heart rate 104, respiratory rate 16, blood pressure 132/80, and oxygen saturation 99%.

This patient will require at least two resources, such as laboratory tests, intravenous fluids, possibly IV medication for nausea, and a CT scan. The triage nurse should assess the patient’s vital signs, paying attention to the heart rate. Although the heart rate is slightly outside the normal range for the patient’s age, this may be attributed to pain or physical activity. Therefore, the appropriate action is to categorize the patient as ESI level 3.

A crying 9-year-old arrives at triage with her mother after slipping on an icy sidewalk and hurting her right forearm. The forearm appears clearly deformed, but circulation, sensation, and movement are intact. According to her mother, the child has no allergies, is not on any medications, and is otherwise healthy. Her vital signs are: blood pressure 100/68, heart rate 124, respiratory rate 32, and oxygen saturation 99 percent.

The child is in pain from her fall and is clearly distressed. She will need at least two resources: an x-ray and an orthopedic consultation, and possibly conscious sedation. Although her heart rate and breathing are increased, the triage nurse can confidently assign her to ESI level 3. The changes in her vital signs are most likely caused by pain and emotional upset.

A 72-year-old woman arrives at the emergency department using nasal cannula oxygen for her advanced COPD. She tells the triage nurse that she has an infected cat bite on her left hand, which appears red, swollen, and tender. She has no other health issues, uses albuterol as needed, and takes a daily aspirin. She has no known drug allergies. Her vital signs are: temperature 99.6°F, heart rate 88, respiratory rate 22, blood pressure 138/80, and oxygen saturation 91%. She reports no difficulty breathing.

This patient needs at least two resources: laboratory tests and intravenous antibiotics. She qualifies for ESI level 3. Although the triage nurse observes that her oxygen saturation and respiratory rate fall outside the normal adult range, the patient has advanced COPD. Therefore, these vital signs are not worrisome, and she will remain at ESI level 3 without being up-triaged.

##### Case Examples

The case studies below illustrate how vital signs information is utilized during ESI triage.

A healthy-appearing 28-year-old woman states, “My doctor said I’m approximately 6 weeks pregnant, and I believe I might be having a miscarriage.” She reports that she began spotting earlier today and is now experiencing cramping. She has no allergies or past medical history and is taking prenatal vitamins. Her vital signs are: temperature 98°F, heart rate 112, respiratory rate 22, and blood pressure 90/60.

This patient qualifies for an upgrade from level 3 to level 2 triage due to her vital signs. Her elevated heart rate and respiratory rate, along with low blood pressure, are worrisome. These symptoms may suggest internal hemorrhage caused by a ruptured ectopic pregnancy.

The mother of a 15-month-old reports that her baby has been experiencing diarrhea since the previous day. She mentions that everyone in the family has recently had the gastrointestinal virus that is circulating. The baby has shown reduced appetite, a mild fever, and several episodes of watery stools. The child is calmly sitting on the mother’s lap. The triage nurse observes indications of dehydration. There is no past medical history, no known drug allergies, and the baby is not on any medications. Vital signs are: temperature 100.4°F, heart rate 142, respiratory rate 48, and blood pressure 76/50.

This patient qualifies for at least ESI level 3. He will need laboratory tests and intravenous fluids as resources. Given his vital signs, the triage nurse may escalate him to ESI level 2. In an infant of this age, both heart rate and respiratory rate exceed the normal limits.

A 57-year-old woman states, “I need to see a doctor about my cough. I can’t seem to get rid of it. I barely slept last night because I was coughing so much, and now I’m extremely tired.” She mentions having a fever of 101° last night and is producing yellow sputum when she coughs. Her medical history includes a hysterectomy three years ago; she is not on any medications but is allergic to Penicillin. Her vital signs are: temperature 101.4°, respiratory rate 28, heart rate 100, and oxygen saturation 90 percent.

At the start of her triage evaluation, this patient appears to possibly have pneumonia. She is likely to require two or more resources, but her low oxygen levels and rapid breathing are worrisome. Based on her vital signs, the triage nurse should upgrade her to an ESI level 2.

A 34-year-old obese woman arrives at triage with complaints of diffuse abdominal pain rated 6 out of 10, ongoing for the past two days. She reports multiple episodes of vomiting and notes that her last bowel movement was three days ago. Her medical history includes back surgery; she is not on any medications and has a peanut allergy. Her vital signs are: temperature 97.8°F, heart rate 104, respiratory rate 16, blood pressure 132/80, and oxygen saturation 99%.

This patient will require at least two resources, such as laboratory tests, intravenous fluids, possibly IV medication for nausea, and a CT scan. The triage nurse should assess the patient’s vital signs, paying attention to the heart rate. Although the heart rate is slightly outside the normal range for the patient’s age, this may be attributed to pain or physical activity. Therefore, the appropriate action is to categorize the patient as ESI level 3.

A crying 9-year-old arrives at triage with her mother after slipping on an icy sidewalk and hurting her right forearm. The forearm appears clearly deformed, but circulation, sensation, and movement are intact. According to her mother, she has no allergies, is not on any medications, and is otherwise healthy. Her vital signs are: blood pressure 100/68, heart rate 124, respiratory rate 32, and oxygen saturation 99 percent.

The child is in pain from her fall and is clearly distressed. She will need at least two resources: an x-ray and an orthopedic consultation, and possibly conscious sedation. Although her heart rate and breathing are increased, the triage nurse can confidently assign her to ESI level 3. The changes in her vital signs are most likely caused by pain and emotional upset.

A 72-year-old woman arrives at the emergency department using nasal cannula oxygen for her advanced COPD. She tells the triage nurse that she has an infected cat bite on her left hand, which appears red, swollen, and tender. She has no other health issues, uses albuterol as needed, and takes a daily aspirin. She has no known drug allergies. Her vital signs are: temperature 99.6°F, heart rate 88, respiratory rate 22, blood pressure 138/80, and oxygen saturation 91%. She reports no difficulty breathing.

This patient needs at least two resources: laboratory tests and intravenous antibiotics. She qualifies for ESI level 3. Although the triage nurse observes that her oxygen saturation and respiratory rate fall outside the normal adult range, the patient has advanced COPD. Therefore, these vital signs are not worrisome, and she will remain at ESI level 3 without being up-triaged.

##### Conclusion

This chapter lays the groundwork for comprehending how vital signs are used within the Emergency Severity Index triage system. It also discusses the unique considerations for patients younger than 36 months. More research is needed to determine the most appropriate vital sign thresholds for emergency department triage. Additional studies will focus on pediatric patients arriving at the emergency department. We anticipate that future updates to the ESI will incorporate new evidence about how well triage vital signs predict outcomes for both pediatric and adult patients.

### Appendix A. Frequently Asked Questions

##### Chapter 3.

###### Frequently Asked Questions

1. Is it necessary to raise an adult patient’s triage level if their heart rate exceeds 100?

No, it is something to take into account.

2. Is it necessary to increase a patient’s triage level if their pain score is 7 out of 10 or higher?

No, this is just one aspect to take into account.

3. Should a patient who is chronically confused always be assigned to ESI level 2?

No, patients experiencing a sudden change in consciousness are classified as ESI level 2.

4. At what times should vital signs be measured?

For any patient classified as ESI level-3, vital signs are always taken if the triage nurse believes they could be helpful.

##### Chapter 4.

###### Frequently Asked Questions

1. Is it necessary to assign an ESI triage level of 2 to a 25-year-old woman who reports her pain as 10 out of 10 but is eating potato chips?

No. Since her vital signs are stable and she doesn’t meet any high-risk criteria, this patient should be categorized as ESI level 3. She will probably require lab tests and at least two resources, such as x-rays, an IV, or pain medication. Therefore, you should not allocate your last available bed to her.

Should an 80-year-old woman with ongoing confusion be assigned an ESI level 2 during triage?

No. The sudden appearance of confusion, lethargy, or disorientation qualifies for ESI level 2.

3. Shouldn’t a patient experiencing active chest pain be assigned an ESI level 1? After all, they ought to receive the highest priority.

Not every patient presenting with chest pain qualifies for ESI level-1. Patients who are unresponsive, without a pulse, not breathing, or in need of immediate life-saving measures fall under level-1. Those with chest pain who appear pale, sweaty, have low blood pressure, or slow heart rate and need urgent IV access to stabilize their condition are also considered level-1. Patients who are stable but experiencing ongoing chest pain generally meet high-risk criteria and should be assigned ESI level-2, with prompt placement arranged.

##### Chapter 5.

###### Frequently Asked Questions

1. Why isn’t teaching someone how to walk with crutches considered a resource?

Although teaching patients how to use crutches can take up a significant amount of the emergency department staff’s time, this instruction is frequently given to individuals with uncomplicated ankle sprains. These cases are generally categorized as ESI level 4 (ankle x-ray = one resource). Such patients are clearly less acute and require fewer resources compared to more complicated cases, such as those with tibia or fibula fractures, who are typically classified as ESI level 3 (leg x-rays, orthopedic consultation, casting or splinting, IV pain management = two or more resources). Using a nursing resource intensity measure would more accurately capture the effort ED staff put into providing crutch-walking instruction.

2. Why doesn’t a splint count as a resource?

Using basic, pre-made splints (like those for ankle sprains) does not count as a resource. However, when ED staff create and apply splints, such as thumb spica splints for thumb fractures, this is considered a resource. To distinguish between patients with extremity injuries: those suspected of having fractures should be assigned ESI 3 (requiring two or more resources, such as x-rays, pain medication, and the creation and application of splints or casts), while those more likely to have simple sprains should be classified as ESI level 4.

3. Why isn’t a saline or heparin lock considered a resource?

In general, placing a heparin lock does not require much time from the emergency department staff. Nevertheless, most patients who receive heparin locks also need at least two additional resources, such as lab tests or IV medications, which typically results in them being categorized as ESI level 3 regardless.

Are all patients undergoing conscious sedation classified as ESI level 3 or above?

Conscious sedation is regarded as a complex procedure (requiring two resources) and is typically carried out on patients who are also undergoing laboratory tests, x-rays, or additional interventions like fracture reduction or dilation and curettage.

5. Are eye irrigation, administration of nebulized medications, and blood transfusions classified as resources?

All three are classified as resources in the context of ESI triage ratings. These resources are typically utilized for patients with more acute conditions, demand considerable time from emergency department staff, and are likely to result in extended patient stays.

6. Do all patients with asthma fall under ESI level 4 since they will need nebulized treatment?

No. Asthma patients who are stable and only need nebulized medication are classified as ESI level 4. Some, however, experience severe respiratory distress and qualify for ESI level 2. Others fall in between, needing intravenous steroids or an x-ray along with nebulized treatments, and are categorized as ESI level 3. Lastly, those who just need a prescription refill for their inhaler are assigned ESI level 5, as they do not need any resources.

##### Chapter 6.

###### Frequently Asked Questions

Why is it unnecessary to use vital signs when triaging patients classified as ESI level 1 or 2?

Vital signs are not required to classify patients as life-threatening (ESI level 1) or high-risk (ESI level 2). Because patients at ESI levels 1 and 2 are in critical condition, they need an immediate response from the medical team. Multiple actions can take place at the same time, and vital signs may be obtained during the initial evaluation in the main acute section of the emergency department.

2. Why are vital signs not mandatory for patients classified as ESI level-4 and 5?

Vital signs are not required to classify patients as low or no resource (ESI level 4 or 5). Additionally, the pain, anxiety, and discomfort experienced during an emergency department visit can often affect a patient’s vital signs, which may normalize soon after the initial evaluation. However, if there are indications of abnormal symptoms—such as changes in skin color, mental status, dizziness, or sweating—a nurse may decide to check vital signs. If there are no physical signs suggesting the need for vital sign assessment, the patient can proceed to the main emergency department or express care area.

3. What is the reason for taking vital signs on patients classified as ESI level-3?

Vital signs help distinguish between patients who require multiple resources and are stable (ESI level 3) and those who may be unstable or at higher risk (ESI level 2). Sometimes, patients classified as ESI level 3 may actually have unstable vital signs despite appearing stable. For ESI level-3 patients, checking vital signs acts as an important safety measure. Typically, ESI level-3 patients have more complex conditions and many end up being admitted to the hospital. Because they are not suitable for the fast-track area, these patients may need to wait longer for definitive care. They pose a particular challenge during triage, making it essential for caregivers to use vital signs to ensure the correct ESI level is assigned.

4. Why are temperatures always taken for pediatric patients under 36 months of age?

Temperature helps distinguish pediatric patients who require few or no resources (ESI level 4 or 5) from those likely to need multiple resources. In infants under three months old, an abnormal temperature can suggest bacteremia and categorize the child as high risk.

5. Why does the literature offer differing perspectives on the importance of vital signs in the triage process?

There is no conclusive evidence regarding the usefulness of vital signs in emergency department triage. Numerous elements can impact the reliability of vital sign measurements, which are somewhat dependent on the person performing the assessment. In certain situations, factors like long-term medication use (for example, beta-blockers) can influence vital signs. Additionally, vital signs can play a role in meeting the public health responsibilities of emergency departments. Finally, they are also used to classify young pediatric patients into different groups.

6. Does JCAHO mandate that vital signs be taken during triage?

The Joint Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations does not explicitly define a standard for vital signs. However, it does state that physiologic parameters should be evaluated based on the patient's condition.

7. Should the vital sign thresholds in the danger zone box be strictly enforced?

In everyday practice, surpassing the danger zone vital sign thresholds leads to up-triage being “considered” instead of being done automatically. The skilled triage nurse must apply sound clinical judgment when assigning the patient’s ESI level. This decision involves evaluating the patient’s vital signs, medical history, medications, and overall clinical presentation. Further research is necessary to establish how well vital signs at triage predict outcomes and to define exact thresholds for up-triage.

8. What should be done if patients classified as ESI level-4 or 5 exhibit danger zone vital signs?

Although taking vital signs is not necessary to assign ESI levels 4 or 5, many patients may still have their vitals checked during triage if that aligns with the emergency department’s procedures. According to the ESI triage guidelines, the triage nurse is not required to consider vital signs when determining if a patient qualifies for ESI level 5 (no resources) or ESI level 4 (one resource). Nonetheless, in real-world settings, a careful nurse will apply clinical judgment and may factor in vital sign data when assigning the ESI level. For example, if a patient only wants a prescription refill, has no acute symptoms, and presents with a heart rate of 104 after walking to the ED, the nurse may still assign an ESI level 5. Conversely, if the same patient has a heart rate of 148 and it is irregular, the nurse should assign an ESI level 2. The triage nurse must also address situations such as elevated blood pressure in a patient otherwise classified as ESI level 4 or 5. If the patient has no symptoms related to the high blood pressure, the triage level should remain unchanged. Typically, elevated blood pressure in an asymptomatic patient will not be managed in the ED, but it is important to refer the patient to a primary care provider for further evaluation and long-term management.

# Emergency Severity Index, Version 4: Implementation Handbook

### Note from the Director

The Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality is proud to present the Emergency Severity Index, Version 4: Implementation Handbook. This guide details every aspect of the Emergency Severity Index (ESI), a five-level triage system used in emergency departments to categorize patients into five groups—ranging from 1 (most urgent) to 5 (least urgent)—based on the severity of their condition and the resources they require.

Following the creation of the ESI by emergency physicians Richard Wuerz and David Eitel in 1998 and successful pilot testing, the ESI Triage Group was established. Additional development of the ESI was supported by a grant from AHRQ. This group, made up of clinicians, managers, educators, and researchers, continued to improve the algorithm into its current form.

Aligned with our mission to enhance the quality, safety, efficiency, and effectiveness of health care for all Americans, AHRQ places a strong focus on training. This handbook, together with the included set of two DVDs, offers essential support to emergency department nurses, physicians, and administrators in establishing a thorough ESI educational program. The resources are grounded in ESI Version 4, which features updates to the algorithm, particularly expanding the criteria for ESI level 1 and refining the guidelines for pediatric fever.

An effectively executed ESI program enables hospital emergency departments to quickly recognize patients requiring urgent care, more accurately identify those who can be safely and efficiently treated in a fast-track or urgent care setting instead of the main ED, and better establish criteria for diverting ambulance patients away from the ED.

We hope this tool proves helpful as you continue working to enhance the quality of care in your emergency department.

### Chapter 2.Triage Acuity Systems

##### Standardization of Triage Acuity

Despite the fact that U.S. emergency departments (EDs) receive over 110 million visits annually (McCaig & Burt, 2004), there is a lack of comprehensive data on these visits at the local, regional, or national scale. This scarcity of information makes it challenging to address key questions such as “Which EDs treat the most critically ill patients?” and “What impact does patient acuity have on ED overcrowding?” As a result, there is increasing interest in developing standardized ED data systems in the United States to enhance clinical care, facilitate ED monitoring, enable benchmarking, and support research efforts (Barthell, Coonan, Finnell, Pollock, & Cochrane, 2004; Gilboy, Travers & Wuerz, 1999; Handler et al., 2004; National Center for Injury Prevention and Control).

A key data point in the emergency department is triage acuity, described by the Data Elements for Emergency Department Systems Task Force as the categorization of a patient's severity, indicating how much their condition threatens life or limb and if urgent intervention is required to relieve symptoms (NCIPC, 1997, p. 94).

There is significant inconsistency among emergency department triage acuity systems, especially within the United States (Emergency Nurses Association [ENA], 1997). Different systems use varying terminology for triage categories, and there is no universal consensus on the definitions for each level. Table 2-1 provides examples of acuity rating systems. Due to the absence of standardized triage acuity data in the U.S., it is understandable that the emergency department has been referred to as a “black box” of crucial public health information that remains mostly inaccessible in its current state (Martinez, 1995).

The Emergency Severity Index (ESI) is an innovative tool for assessing triage acuity in emergency departments. Research has demonstrated its consistency across various ED environments, including both urban and rural areas as well as academic and community hospitals (Eitel, Travers, Rosenau, Gilboy & Wuerz, 2003). With widespread adoption in U.S. emergency departments, the ESI could serve as a standard method for triage acuity assessment. This chapter outlines the traditional triage systems used in U.S. EDs and reviews the research related to those systems. It then provides a brief overview of newer triage approaches developed in Australia, Canada, and the United Kingdom. The chapter ends with an examination of studies on the ESI system and explores its potential advantages.

##### Triage Systems in the United States

Although numerous hospitals in the United States continue to utilize three- or four-level triage systems, there is a movement toward adopting five-level systems. The National Center for Health Statistics intends to substitute four-level triage data with five-level data in upcoming national benchmarking surveys of U.S. emergency departments. This change is driven by increasing evidence that five-level triage acuity data are more reliable and valid compared to three-level systems (personal communication, Linda McCaig, National Center for Health Statistics, October 6, 2004).

Both the ENA and the American College of Emergency Physicians (ACEP) have expressed their support for five-level triage systems in U.S. emergency departments. In 2003, a joint task force from ENA and ACEP was formed to review the evidence regarding five-level triage systems, and their work is still in progress. That same year, ACEP and ENA released a joint statement:

ACEP and ENA believe that patient care quality would improve by introducing a standardized triage scale and acuity classification system in emergency departments. Drawing on expert consensus and current evidence, ACEP and ENA endorse the use of a dependable, validated five-level triage scale (ACEP, 2003; ENA, 2003).

A 2005 task force paper recommended both the ESI and the Canadian Triage and Acuity Scale (CTAS) as reliable and valid triage methods (Fernandes et al., 2005). With increasing evidence favoring five-level triage systems, it is probable that a greater number of U.S. hospitals have adopted some version of this approach. The ENA intends to gather information on the triage systems used by U.S. hospitals in their forthcoming ED survey.

##### Research on Triage Systems in the United States

Research on triage acuity systems is increasing, with studies primarily examining two important aspects of triage nurses’ acuity ratings: reliability and validity (Pedhazur & Schmelkin, 1991; Waltz, Strickland & Lenz, 1991). Reliability refers to the consistency or level of agreement among users of a rating system. In the context of emergency department (ED) triage, there are two relevant types of reliability. Interrater reliability assesses whether two different nurses would assign the same triage acuity level to the same patient, while intrarater reliability evaluates if the same nurse would give the same rating to the same patient at different times. Multiple studies in the United States have found that traditional three-level triage systems often have low interrater and intrarater reliability (Gill, Reese & Diamond, 1996; Travers, Waller, Bowling, Flowers & Tintinalli, 2002; Wuerz, Fernandes & Alarcon, 1998). For example, in one study, 305 triage assessments were analyzed after all triage nurses completed a required refresher course on the hospital’s three-level triage system (Travers et al., 2002). The initial ratings by the triage nurses were compared to retrospective ratings made by an expert panel of ED triage nurses, and the two groups agreed in only about half of the cases.

Validity refers to how accurately the rating system measures what it is supposed to measure. In the context of acuity ratings, validity indicates whether a label such as “nonurgent” truly reflects the absence of urgency in an emergency department patient’s condition. Assessing the validity of triage acuity has been challenging, and it has not been documented in research studies.

In contrast to urine culture—which serves as the gold standard for accurately diagnosing urinary tract infections—there is no definitive gold standard for assessing the accuracy of triage acuity ratings in the conventional three-level triage system used in the United States. Instead, surrogate indicators such as admission rates, resource use, and six-month mortality have been employed to evaluate five-level triage systems.

##### Triage Acuity Research on Five- Level Systems Abroad

Highly reliable and well-established five-level triage systems are now the norm in several other countries. Table 2-2 outlines three of these systems.

The Australasian Triage Scale (ATS), created in Australia, has been implemented across Australia and New Zealand since the early 1990s (Australasian College for Emergency Medicine, 1994, 2002; Cameron, Bradt & Ashby, 1996). The Australian Council on Healthcare Standards uses the ATS as the foundation for emergency department (ED) evaluation and quality assurance, with triage classifications regularly reviewed. Australian EDs are required to manage patients according to guidelines determined by their triage level. For instance, emergency cases must be attended to within 10 minutes, while nonurgent cases should be seen within 2 hours.

Several studies have assessed the validity and reliability of the ATS. Since there is no definitive gold standard for evaluating triage acuity, researchers have compared the five-level system to other illness severity scales and patient outcomes (Cameron et al., 1996; Cleary, Ashby, Jelinek & Lagaida, 1994; Erwich, Bond, Phillips, & Baggoley, 1997). Triage categories have shown strong correlations with disease- and population-specific measures, such as the Injury Severity Scales, trauma scores, and scales for cardiac, asthma, and pediatric patients. The ATS has also demonstrated a strong relationship with resource use and outcome indicators, including admission rates, emergency department length of stay, and mortality. Additionally, studies in which triage nurses assigned acuity levels to case scenarios have found that the ATS exhibits fair to moderate interrater reliability (Dilley & Standen, 1998; Jelinek & Little, 1996).

Five-level triage systems have been adopted in both the United Kingdom (U.K.) and Canada. In the U.K., the Manchester Triage Scale is utilized.

The system, developed in the U.K., uses a flow-chart presentation style (Manchester Triage Group, 1997). Nurses begin by determining the patient's main complaint, then select one of 52 flow charts to guide a structured interview and assign a triage category ranging from 1 (requiring immediate attention) to 5 (care needed within four hours). The Accident and Emergency Nurses Association has endorsed this system (Zimmermann, 2001). However, research on the Manchester system is limited. In one reliability study, triage assessments by nurses were retrospectively compared to those of senior medical staff, with only fair to moderate agreement found (Goodacre, Gillett, Harris & Houlihan, 1999).

The Canadian Triage and Acuity Scale (CTAS) was created by a team of Canadian emergency physicians (Beveridge & Ducharme, 1997; Canadian Association for Emergency Physicians [CAEP], 2002). Both the National Emergency Nurses' Affiliation, Inc. (NENA) and the Canadian Association for Emergency Physicians (CAEP) have recognized CTAS as the national benchmark for emergency department triage. Canadian hospitals are mandated to report data, including CTAS scores, for all emergency department visits to the Canadian government. Research has also demonstrated that the Canadian five-level scale provides strong interrater reliability when clinicians assess the severity of written scenarios based on real patient cases.

##### History of the Emergency Severity Index (ESI)

The Emergency Severity Index (ESI) is a five-level triage system created by emergency department physicians Richard Wuerz and David Eitel in the United States (Gilboy et al., 1999; Wuerz, Milne, Eitel, Travers & Gilboy, 2000). The founders believed that a key function of an emergency department triage tool is to help prioritize patients according to the seriousness of their conditions. Triage nurses assess priority by asking, “Who should be seen first?” However, Drs. Wuerz and Eitel recognized that when several high-priority patients arrive at the same time, the question shifts to, “How long can each patient safely wait?” The ESI was designed based on a new approach to ED triage. Beyond determining which patient needs immediate attention, the ESI also guides triage nurses in identifying the resources required for each patient’s care in the ED. While maintaining the traditional focus on patient urgency, the ESI introduces a second objective: not only sorting patients, but also directing them to the appropriate resources, ensuring that each patient receives the right care at the right time and place.

The initial version (v. 1) of the ESI was first used at two university-affiliated emergency departments in the spring of 1999. By fall 2000, the ESI was updated with input from emergency department clinicians to add triage criteria for pediatric patients, and this second version (v. 2) was then introduced in five more hospitals, including both non-university teaching and community hospitals. Feedback from nurses and physicians at these locations, combined with the best available scientific evidence, led to further improvements, resulting in version 3 (v. 3) in 2001 (Wuerz et al., 2001). More recent developments have produced additional updates to the tool, which is presented in this edition of the ESI handbook as version 4 (v. 4) (Tanabe et al., in press).

Emergency physicians and nurses in the United States and Canada have carried out multiple research studies evaluating the reliability and validity of the ESI. The ESI has been directly compared with traditional three-level triage systems as well as the five-level CTAS. These studies will be discussed later in the chapter. Similar to the Australasian, Canadian, and U.K. systems, the ESI triage system consists of five levels. However, it differs in both its conceptual framework and practical use. The triage systems from Australia, Canada, and the U.K. are based on the idea that triage is meant to determine how long a patient can safely wait for care in the emergency department, with specific definitions for the time to physician assessment included in their protocols. This is a key distinction between ESI and both CTAS and the ATS, as ESI does not specify expected time frames for physician evaluation.

The ESI stands out because it requires the triage nurse to predict the resources a patient will need—such as diagnostic tests and procedures—in addition to assessing acuity, in order to assign a triage category for patients who are less critically ill. The ESI triage levels are shown in Figure 2-1. Later chapters will explain in detail how to use the ESI to categorize emergency department patients. In summary, the process begins with evaluating acuity by considering the stability of the patient’s vital signs and the risk of an immediate threat to life or organs. For patients who are stable, the nurse then estimates the resources likely needed to reach a disposition in the emergency department, based on their professional judgment. These resource requirements can vary from none to two or more.

##### Research on the Emergency Severity Index

In a preliminary study evaluating ESI v.1 ratings for 493 triage cases at two Boston hospitals in 1998, researchers determined that the system was both valid and reliable (Wuerz et al., 2000). During the study, patients were triaged at the same time by the triage nurse using the standard three-level scale and by a research nurse applying the first version of the ESI. Afterwards, an investigator, who was unaware of the research nurse’s ESI rating, assigned an ESI level based solely on the written triage note. The triage levels showed a strong correlation with the resources utilized in the emergency department and with outcomes like hospital admission. Patients with higher acuity (ESI levels 1 and 2) required more resources and had a greater likelihood of being admitted compared to those with lower acuity (ESI levels 4 and 5). The agreement between the research nurse and the investigator was high, with 77 percent matching exactly and 22 percent differing by only one triage level.

Several studies have assessed the reliability of the ESI by using the kappa statistic to determine inter-rater agreement, where kappa values range from 0 (no agreement) to 1 (perfect agreement). At one of the original ESI sites, a time series design was employed to compare triage reliability using a three-level scale before and after the introduction of ESI v.1 (Travers et al., 2002). The reliability improved, with the weighted kappa increasing from 0.53 with the three-level system to 0.68 with the five-level ESI. Another study investigated the reliability and validity of ESI v.2 during and after its implementation in triage at seven hospitals in the northeast and southeast. Over 200 triage nurses participated in an ESI triage education program, where they rated 40 case studies using the ESI (Eitel et al., 2003). The findings showed substantial inter-rater reliability, with kappa values between 0.70 and 0.80. Additionally, 386 actual patient triage decisions were analyzed, revealing high inter-rater reliability with weighted kappas from 0.69 to 0.87. In a separate study conducted at an urban emergency department in the Midwest, researchers assessed the reliability of ESI v.3 for 403 real patient triages and found a kappa of 0.89 (Tanabe, Gimbel, Yarnold, Kyriacou & Adams, 2004).

Researchers from Canada and the United States have directly compared the inter-rater reliability of the ESI and CTAS in a randomized study (Worster et al., 2004). The study involved ten Canadian triage nurses who were experienced with CTAS. These nurses were randomly assigned to receive either ESI version 3 or CTAS refresher training, after which they evaluated 200 case studies using the respective triage system. Both groups demonstrated excellent inter-rater reliability, with kappa values of 0.89 for ESI and 0.91 for CTAS.

The effectiveness of the ESI has been assessed by analyzing outcomes in several thousand patients. Research has demonstrated consistent and strong associations between the ESI and factors such as hospitalization, emergency department length of stay, and mortality (Eitel et al., 2003; Tanabe et al., 2004; Wuerz, 2001; Wuerz et al., 2001). Additionally, the ESI has shown moderate correlations with physician evaluation and management codes, as well as nursing workload indicators (Travers et al., 2002). The ESI also enables meaningful comparisons of patient case mix across different hospitals. In one study, a stratified random sample of 200 patients was taken from each of the seven original ESI hospitals to compare case mix (Eitel et al., 2003). As anticipated, tertiary care centers had a greater proportion of high-acuity patients, while community hospitals had more patients requiring fewer resources.

A survey conducted among nursing staff at the two initial university teaching hospitals found that the response to the ESI implementation was favorable (Wuerz et al., 2001). Nurses indicated that the ESI was simpler to use and more effective for prioritizing patients for care compared to the previous three-level systems used at those locations.

In the latest ESI study, the accuracy of ESI level 2 was closely analyzed (Tanabe et al., in press). Reviewing the outcomes of 571 patients assigned to ESI level 2 across five hospitals, researchers discovered that 20 percent required immediate, life-saving treatment. The study’s authors suggested that these patients should be categorized as ESI level 1. The revised ESI version 4, discussed in subsequent chapters of this book, incorporates changes informed by these findings.

##### Benefits of the Emergency Severity Index

The ESI has been adopted by hospitals across various regions, including both university and community hospitals, as well as teaching and nonteaching facilities. Clinicians, managers, and researchers in these settings have recognized several advantages of ESI triage compared to traditional three-level systems. One key advantage is the ability to quickly identify patients who require immediate care. ESI triage emphasizes the efficient sorting of patients, especially when resources are limited. In some ways, ESI triage returns to the original intent of triage, as established during Napoleon’s era. It involves rapidly categorizing patients into five groups based on significant clinical differences in anticipated resource needs, which also informs operational requirements. Utilizing ESI for this swift categorization can enhance patient flow through the emergency department. After an ESI triage level is determined, patients can be directed to further assessment, registration, initial treatment, or the waiting area, depending on their severity and expected resource use. For instance, patients classified as level 1 or 2 are taken directly to the treatment area for prompt evaluation and care, while those at levels 4 and 5 proceed to registration and then wait for an available bed.

A key concern separate from ESI triage is when to perform a full nursing assessment. Many experts suggest that a comprehensive assessment does not need to be completed at the initial triage station, but can instead take place in the main treatment area or a secondary triage area, depending on each patient’s needs and the current workload in the emergency department (Gilboy et al., 1999). At triage, only the evaluation necessary to assign an ESI level is required to help with the initial sorting of patients. Full clinical assessments are time-consuming, and performing them at triage can delay care and lower satisfaction for patients with less severe conditions. As patient numbers and case complexity rise, leading to ED crowding, it is necessary to rethink traditional care processes to improve efficiency and effectiveness. Nevertheless, it remains essential to gather enough information to accurately determine the appropriate triage category. This is particularly important when patients face long waits to see a physician, which is common with higher patient volumes. Triage has become even more vital as waiting room times increase. Assigning a patient to an inappropriately low triage category can heighten the risk of poor outcomes due to the resulting extended wait.

Additional advantages of the ESI include its ability to identify patients who do not require care in the main emergency department and can instead be safely and more efficiently managed in a fast-track or urgent care setting. For instance, in many hospitals, triage guidelines specify that all ESI level 4 and 5 patients may be directed to either medical urgent care or minor trauma sections of the ED. The policy also permits certain level-3 patients, such as those needing straightforward migraine treatment, to be sent to urgent care. ESI level-3 patients assigned to urgent care, as well as any patients transferred from urgent care to the acute area for more serious issues, are tracked through the quality improvement program. Nurses using the ESI have noted that it improves communication about patient acuity compared to the previous three-level triage systems used at these facilities (Wuerz et al., 2001). For example, a triage nurse can simply say to the charge nurse, “I need a bed for a level 2 patient,” and this shared terminology allows the charge nurse to immediately understand the situation without needing a detailed explanation.

The ESI has also served as the basis for emergency department policies targeting certain groups. For instance, at one location, the psychiatric team is required to provide consultations for level 2 and 3 patients within 30 minutes, and for level 4 and 5 patients within an hour of being notified. At another facility, the ESI is part of a policy for patients over 20 weeks pregnant who come to the ED. Patients assigned ESI levels 1 and 2 receive care in the ED by emergency medicine staff with an obstetric consultation, while those at levels 3, 4, or 5 are directed to the hospital’s labor and delivery unit.

The ESI is also an effective method for setting thresholds to divert ambulance patients away from the ED. At Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston, the ED Diversion Policy and Guidelines define full capacity as all RN-staffed ED beds being occupied. The ESI is utilized to assess when the department is over capacity.

Studies have demonstrated that the ESI is a dependable and accurate method for assessing triage acuity. This system has been implemented in numerous emergency departments across various regions of the United States, including both academic and community hospitals. Hospitals using the ESI have shown its benefits in enhancing emergency department operations and patient care. Broader use of the ESI in U.S. hospitals could help create a standardized approach to triage acuity assessment, supporting benchmarking, public health monitoring, and research efforts.

### Chapter 3. Introduction to the Emergency Severity Index

The Emergency Severity Index (ESI) is an easy-to-use, five-level triage tool that classifies emergency department patients by assessing both the severity of their condition and the resources they will require. The triage nurse first evaluates the patient’s acuity. If the patient does not qualify for the highest acuity levels (ESI level 1 or 2), the nurse then considers the anticipated resource needs to assign a triage level (ESI level 3, 4, or 5). Unlike other triage systems, the ESI uniquely incorporates resource requirements into its triage decisions. Acuity is judged based on the stability of vital signs and the risk to life, limb, or organ function. The nurse predicts resource needs by drawing on experience with patients who have similar symptoms or injuries. Resource needs refer to the number of interventions or services a patient is likely to need before a decision about their care can be made. After becoming familiar with the ESI algorithm, the triage nurse can quickly and accurately assign patients to one of five clearly defined, non-overlapping categories. The ESI offers emergency departments a triage system that is both valid and reliable (Eitel, Travers, Rosenau, Gilboy & Wuerz, 2003; Travers, Waller, Bowling, Flowers & Tintinalli, 2002; Wuerz, Travers, Gilboy, Eitel, Rosenau & Yazhari, 2001; Tanabe, Gimbel, Yarnold, Kyriacou, & Adams, 2004; Tanabe, Gimbel, Yarnold, & Adams, 2004).

This chapter offers a detailed, step-by-step guide to triaging using the ESI algorithm. Later chapters delve deeper into essential concepts and include many examples to illustrate the nuances of applying ESI.

Algorithms are commonly utilized in emergency care settings. Most emergency healthcare providers are acquainted with the algorithms taught in programs like Basic Life Support, Advanced Cardiac Life Support, and the Trauma Nursing Core Course. These programs offer a systematic, stepwise method for clinical decision making that clinicians can master through repeated practice. At each stage, the algorithm guides the user on which questions to pose or what information to collect. Depending on the responses or data gathered, a decision is reached, and the algorithm leads the user to the subsequent step, eventually resulting in an outcome.

Using the ESI algorithm for triage requires an experienced emergency department nurse to begin at the top of the algorithm. Figure 3-1 provides a conceptual summary of the ESI algorithm, highlighting its key decision points. A more detailed explanation of the actual ESI algorithm is given later in the chapter (see Figure 3-1a). The algorithm involves four decision points (A, B, C, and D) to categorize patients into one of five triage levels (refer to Figure 3-1). With experience, the triage nurse will be able to quickly progress through each ESI decision point.

##### Decision Point A: Is the Patient Dying?

In simple terms, at decision point A (Figure 3-2), the triage nurse determines whether the patient is dying. If the response is “yes,” the triage process ends, and the patient is immediately assigned to ESI level 1. If the answer is “no,” the process continues to the next step in the algorithm, decision point B.

This question helps assess if the patient is at risk of imminent death (conceptual algorithm): Does the patient need urgent life-saving measures? The questions below assist in evaluating whether the patient fulfills level-1 criteria:

Does the patient need urgent airway management, medication, or another hemodynamic intervention?

Does the patient exhibit any of the following: is already intubated, not breathing, without a pulse, experiencing severe respiratory distress, has an SpO2 below 90 percent, shows sudden changes in mental status, or is unresponsive?

Studies have shown that triage nurses can reliably anticipate when immediate interventions are necessary (Tanabe et al., in press). For ESI triage, Table 3-1 outlines which interventions are classified as life-saving and which are not.

Interventions that are not classified as life-saving may include certain diagnostic or therapeutic procedures, but do not involve actions that would directly “save a life.” Life-saving interventions focus on ensuring an open airway, sustaining breathing, or supporting circulation. The following questions may assist in assessing whether a patient needs a life-saving intervention.

Is this patient's airway open and unobstructed?

Is the patient showing signs of breathing?

Is the patient exhibiting a pulse?

Is the nurse worried about the pulse’s rate, rhythm, and strength?

Was this patient intubated before arriving at the hospital due to worries about their capacity to keep their airway open, breathe on their own, or sustain adequate oxygen levels?

Is the nurse worried about whether this patient can supply enough oxygen to their tissues?

An ESI level-1 patient arrives at the emergency department in a critical, unstable state. Immediate intervention is essential to prevent death, prompting a coordinated team response with the physician present at the bedside and nurses delivering intensive care. These patients receive immediate attention, as prompt treatment can influence their risk of complications or death.

A primary distinction between ESI level-1 and level-2 patients is the necessity for immediate physician involvement in patient care. Level-1 patients are in critical condition and need prompt evaluation and intervention by a physician. In contrast, although level-2 patients are also seriously ill, emergency nurses can begin treatment using established protocols without a physician present. The nurse understands that interventions are required but is assured that the patient’s condition is stable enough not to worsen rapidly. The nurse can start intravenous lines, provide supplemental oxygen, perform an ECG, and connect the patient to a cardiac monitor before a physician is required at the bedside.

When assessing the necessity for urgent lifesaving measures, the triage nurse thoroughly examines the patient’s respiratory condition and oxygen saturation (SpO2) levels. Even if a patient is still breathing, severe respiratory distress or an SpO2 below 90 percent indicates a critical need for prompt action to secure the airway and ensure adequate oxygenation. Such a patient will need the physician present to administer medications for rapid sequence intubation or to initiate other airway and breathing interventions.

Patients presenting with chest pain should be assessed according to the same standards. While some individuals with chest pain are quite stable and may only need a diagnostic ECG, they do not fulfill level-1 criteria. In contrast, those who appear pale, sweaty, in acute respiratory distress, or are hemodynamically unstable will need urgent, life-saving treatment and do qualify for level-1 criteria. Every patient with chest pain must be evaluated against the level-1 criteria to decide if immediate life-saving intervention is necessary.

When deciding if a patient needs immediate life-saving care, the triage nurse must evaluate the patient’s level of consciousness. The ESI algorithm utilizes the AVPU scale (alert, verbal, pain, unresponsive) as shown in Table 3-2. This step aims to identify patients experiencing a sudden change in consciousness. The nurse should look for deviations from the patient’s baseline, with particular concern for those who were previously alert but are now categorized as P (pain) or U (unresponsive). Unresponsiveness should be considered in the context of sudden neurological changes, and not in patients with pre-existing developmental delays, documented dementia, or aphasia. Any patient who is unresponsive—including those who are intoxicated and do not respond to painful stimuli—meets level-1 criteria and requires immediate assessment. For instance, a patient with a sudden decrease in mental status who cannot maintain their airway or is experiencing severe respiratory distress would need urgent intervention.

Users familiar with ESI version 3 (v. 3) will observe a significant modification in the criteria for ESI level 1. The primary distinction between ESI v. 3 and ESI version 4 (v. 4) is the recognition and reclassification of some of the most critically ill patients, who were previously categorized as ESI level 2. Now, patients who need immediate life-saving interventions are assigned to ESI level 1. Under the earlier version, a patient experiencing severe respiratory distress who needed intubation but was still breathing would have been placed in ESI level 2. In the current version, this patient now qualifies for level 1. Additional examples of patients now considered ESI level 1 include those who are weak and dizzy with a heart rate of 30 or 200. While this adjustment may not impact a large number of patients, it ensures that the most critically ill are classified correctly. Before v. 4, triage nurses often faced two types of ESI level-2 patients: those needing immediate attention and those who could safely wait a short period (about 10 minutes) without worsening. This issue prompted a large, multi-center, prospective study to determine which ESI level-2 patients actually received immediate interventions (Tanabe et al., in press). The findings from that study led to the revision of the ESI system. This new edition of the ESI handbook outlines these updates and explains ESI v. 4.

An ESI level-1 patient does not necessarily arrive at the emergency department by ambulance. Individuals with drug overdoses or acute alcohol intoxication might be left at the entrance, while children could be brought in by car and carried inside. An experienced triage nurse can quickly recognize these critically ill patients. With a swift, visual assessment from a distance, the nurse identifies those in severe distress. These patients are promptly moved to the treatment area, where resuscitation begins immediately.

Patients classified as ESI level 1 make up about 1 to 3 percent of all emergency department cases (Eitel et al., 2003; Wuerz, Milne, Eitel, Travers & Gilboy, 2000; Wuerz et al., 2001). These patients require immediate resuscitation by either the emergency physician and nurse or the trauma or code team upon arrival. Research on ESI indicates that the majority of ESI level-1 patients are admitted to intensive care units, while some die in the emergency department (Eitel et al., 2003; Wuerz, 2001). A small number of ESI level-1 patients are discharged from the ED if their altered level of consciousness or vital functions are reversible, as seen in cases of hypoglycemia, seizures, alcohol intoxication, or anaphylaxis.

Illustrations of ESI level 1:

Heart stoppage.

Cessation of breathing.

Acute difficulty breathing.

Oxygen saturation below 90%.

Severely injured trauma patient arriving in an unresponsive state.

Overdose presenting with a respiratory rate of 6.

Three general questions are utilized to assess if the patient satisfies level-2 criteria.

Is this considered a high-risk scenario?

2. Does the patient exhibit confusion, lethargy, or disorientation?

3. Is the patient experiencing significant pain or discomfort?

The triage nurse gathers relevant subjective and objective data to promptly address these questions. This section provides a concise overview of ESI level-2 criteria, with a more comprehensive discussion of patients qualifying for ESI level-2 to be covered in Chapter 4.

Severe breathing difficulty accompanied by agonal or gasping respirations.

Markedly slow or fast heart rate accompanied by evidence of inadequate tissue perfusion.

Low blood pressure accompanied by indications of inadequate tissue perfusion.

A trauma patient in need of urgent resuscitation with crystalloids and colloids.

Experiencing chest pain, appearing pale and sweaty, with a blood pressure of 70 by palpation.

Feeling weak and lightheaded, heart rate is 30.

Severe allergic response.

Infant exhibiting limpness.

Unconscious with a strong smell of alcohol.

Low blood sugar accompanied by altered mental state.

##### Decision Point B: Should the Patient Wait?

After the triage nurse establishes that the patient does not qualify for ESI level 1, they proceed to decision point B (refer to Figure 33). At this stage, the nurse must determine if the patient can safely wait to be evaluated. If waiting is not appropriate, the patient is assigned ESI level 2. If the patient is able to wait, the process continues to the following step in the algorithm.

###### Is This a High-risk Situation?

Drawing on a brief patient interview, general observations, and the intuition developed through experience, the triage nurse identifies patients at high risk. Often, factors such as the patient’s age and medical history play a role in this assessment. A high-risk patient is someone whose condition could quickly worsen or who shows symptoms indicating a need for urgent, time-sensitive care. This type of patient may face a significant threat to life or organ function. In most cases, a comprehensive physical exam or a complete set of vital signs is not necessary to recognize high risk. Instead, the patient may describe symptoms that an experienced triage nurse immediately recognizes as serious. For instance, a patient who says, “I never get headaches and after lifting something heavy, I now have the worst headache of my life,” would be triaged as ESI level 2, as these symptoms could indicate a subarachnoid hemorrhage.

If a patient is classified as ESI level 2, the triage nurse has determined that it is not safe for them to wait in the waiting area for any period of time. Although ESI guidelines do not specify exact time frames, ESI level-2 patients are a high priority and should typically be placed and begin receiving treatment within 10 minutes of their arrival. It is crucial to note that even though the criteria for level 1 have broadened in version 4 of the algorithm, ESI level-2 patients are still regarded as very ill and at significant risk. Immediate care is necessary, and a suitable bed must be located right away. In most cases, instead of moving on to the next patient, the triage nurse recognizes that this patient is so unwell that the charge nurse or staff in the care area should be notified immediately about the presence of an ESI level-2 patient.

Instances of situations considered high-risk:

Experiencing ongoing chest pain suggestive of coronary syndrome, but currently stable and not in need of urgent life-saving treatment.

A healthcare worker experiences a needlestick injury.

Shows symptoms of a stroke, but does not fulfill level-1 requirements.

Ectopic pregnancy has been ruled out; the patient is hemodynamically stable.

A patient undergoing chemotherapy, and thus immunosuppressed, presenting with a fever.

A patient exhibiting suicidal or homicidal tendencies.

Chapter 4 provides further details about high-risk situations.

###### Is the Patient Confused, Lethargic, or Disoriented?

This is the second question to consider at decision point B. Once more, the focus is on determining if the patient is experiencing a sudden change in consciousness. Patients who are normally confused do not qualify for level-2 criteria.

Confused: Shows unsuitable reactions to stimuli, with reduced attention span and impaired memory.

Lethargic: Sleepy, spends more time sleeping than normal, but reacts properly when prompted.

Disoriented: The patient cannot accurately respond to questions regarding time, location, or identity.

Instances of patients who exhibit confusion, lethargy, or disorientation:

Recent development of confusion in an older adult.

The 3-month-old whose mother says the baby is constantly sleeping.

The teenager was discovered in a state of confusion and disorientation.

All of these examples suggest that the brain could be impaired either structurally or chemically.

###### Is This Patient in Severe Pain or Distress?

At decision point B, the triage nurse’s third question is whether the patient is experiencing pain or distress. If the answer is “no,” the nurse proceeds to the next step in the process. If the answer is “yes,” the nurse must evaluate the severity of the pain or distress, using clinical observation and/or a self-reported pain score of 7 or above on a 0 to 10 scale. When a patient reports pain at 7/10 or higher, the nurse may consider assigning an ESI level 2, but this is not mandatory. Pain is a frequent reason for emergency department visits, and not all patients with pain scores of 7/10 or more require an ESI level-2 classification. For instance, a patient with a sprained ankle and pain rated at 8/10 would typically be categorized as ESI level 4. Assigning a level 2 rating based solely on pain is not necessary in such cases.

In certain patients, pain can be evaluated through clinical observation, such as noting distressed facial expressions, sweating, body posture, and alterations in vital signs. The triage nurse looks for physical signs of acute pain that validate the patient’s reported pain level. For instance, a patient with abdominal pain who is sweating, has a rapid heart rate, and elevated blood pressure, or a patient experiencing severe flank pain accompanied by vomiting, pale skin, and a history of kidney stones, are both clear examples of individuals who qualify for ESI level-2. More details about ESI level 2 and pain assessment can be found in Chapter 4.

Severe distress may be either physical or mental. Instances of distress include a victim of sexual assault, an aggressive patient, or a person with bipolar disorder experiencing a manic episode.

ESI level-2 patients represent a relatively small but high-risk segment, making up 20 to 30 percent of emergency department visits (Travers et al., 2002; Wuerz et al., 2001; Tanabe, Gimbel et al., 2004). After identifying an ESI level-2 patient, the triage nurse must ensure prompt care. Registration may be handled by a family member or completed at the bedside. These patients require vital signs and a thorough nursing assessment, though this does not have to occur during triage. Patient placement should not be postponed to complete vital sign collection. Studies on ESI indicate that 50 to 60 percent of ESI level-2 patients are admitted from the emergency department (Wuerz et al., 2001).

##### Decision Point C: Resource Needs

If the answers to the first two decision points are “no,” the triage nurse proceeds to decision point C (refer to Figure 3-4). At this stage, the nurse should ask, “How many different resources will this patient likely require for the physician to make a disposition decision?” The possible dispositions include discharging the patient home, admitting them to the observation unit or hospital, or transferring them to another facility. This step again relies on the triage nurse’s previous experience with similar emergency department cases. It is important for ED nurses to recognize that estimating resource needs is based on standards of care and is not influenced by the hospital’s type (teaching or non-teaching) or its location. Any patient presenting to an emergency department should generally require the same resources to reach a disposition. Taking into account the patient’s brief subjective and objective evaluation, medical history, allergies, medications, age, and gender, the nurse must determine how many different resources will be used for the physician to decide on a disposition. Essentially, what is the usual protocol for a patient presenting with this common complaint in the ED? The triage nurse should make this judgment based on their assessment of the patient, focusing on standard practices in the specific emergency department rather than individual provider preferences.

To determine what resources are needed, the triage nurse should understand the standards of care in the emergency department. The nurse must also be aware of the idea of “prudent and customary.” An effective way to approach this is to consider, “Based on this patient’s main complaint or injury, what resources will the emergency physician probably use?” Resources may include hospital services, diagnostic tests, procedures, consultations, or interventions that go beyond the physician’s history and physical exam, as well as basic emergency department actions like applying a bandage. Additional details and examples can be found in Chapter 5.

Table 3-3 outlines what qualifies and does not qualify as a resource for ESI triage classification. Patients at ESI level 3 are expected to need two or more resources, those at ESI level 4 are anticipated to need one resource, and ESI level 5 patients are expected to need none, as shown in Table 3-4.

Studies indicate that ESI level-3 patients account for 30% to 40% of those treated in the emergency department (Eitel et al., 2003; Wuerz et al., 2001). These individuals typically need more comprehensive assessments but are considered stable in the short term, which can result in longer ED stays. ESI level 4 and 5 patients represent 20% to 35% of emergency department visits, and this percentage may be higher in areas with limited access to primary care. Properly trained mid-level providers with suitable skill sets could manage these patients in fast-track or express care units, especially since many present with trauma-related issues. Given their stable condition, it is safe for these patients to wait several hours before being seen.

##### Decision Point D:The Patient's Vital Signs

Prior to assigning a patient to ESI level 3, the nurse must review the patient’s vital signs to determine if they fall outside the normal range for the patient’s age and if these abnormalities are clinically significant. If the vital signs are abnormal, the triage nurse should consider elevating the triage level to ESI level 2. Ultimately, it is up to the triage nurse to decide whether the patient should be upgraded to ESI level 2 due to abnormal vital signs. This is referred to as decision point D.

Vital sign parameters vary by age (refer to Figure 3-5). The vital signs considered include pulse, respiratory rate, and oxygen saturation, with body temperature also assessed in children under three years old. Based on these criteria, a triage nurse may decide to upgrade an adult patient with a heart rate of 104, or keep them at ESI level 3. Similarly, a 6-month-old infant with a cold and a respiratory rate of 48 might be assigned to ESI level 2 or 3. The nurse must determine, using the patient’s history and physical exam, whether the vital signs indicate a high enough risk that the patient should not wait to be evaluated. Chapter 6 provides a detailed discussion of vital signs and includes examples.

Temperature is considered only for children younger than three years old. A high fever may prevent young children from being placed in categories 4 and 5. This approach helps to identify children who may have bacteremia and ensures they are not directed to a fast track area or made to wait for an extended period. Detailed pediatric fever guidelines will be provided in Chapter 6.

###### Does Time to Treatment Influence ESI Triage Categories?

Estimating how long a patient can wait before being seen by a doctor is a key part of most triage systems. The Australasian and Canadian Triage Systems specify that patients must be evaluated by a physician within a set timeframe according to their triage level. In contrast, the ESI does not set strict time requirements for physician assessment. Nonetheless, patients classified as ESI level 2 should receive prompt attention, though the exact timing is determined by each institution’s policy. There is often confusion between institutional policies, the actual process of patient care, and the ESI triage level.

We will present four patient cases where there may appear to be a contradiction between patient flow and triage category. Trauma patients often arrive at triage after experiencing a significant injury mechanism, such as being an unrestrained passenger in a high-speed car accident. Sometimes, these patients do not arrive by ambulance but instead come to triage on their own, reporting localized right upper quadrant pain and having stable vital signs. Although this patient is physiologically stable, walked into the emergency department, and does not meet the criteria for ESI level 1, they are still at high risk for injuries like a liver laceration and other serious trauma, so they should be assigned ESI level 2. Many emergency departments have trauma protocols and trauma response levels that require prompt initiation of care. Both triage level and trauma response level are important and should be documented as separate scores. While the triage nurse correctly identifies this as a physiologically stable trauma patient and assigns ESI level 2, she should also ensure the patient is placed and managed according to trauma policy. The patient is likely stable for at least another 10 minutes and does not need immediate life-saving interventions. However, if the same patient arrived with a palpable blood pressure of 80, they would be classified as ESI level 1 and would need urgent, life-saving hemodynamic interventions.

Another instance of policies influencing triage levels involves patients presenting with stable chest pain. If a patient is physiologically stable but has chest pain that could indicate an acute coronary syndrome, they qualify for ESI level-2. These patients do not need immediate life-saving measures but are considered high risk. Their treatment is time-sensitive, and an ECG should be completed within 10 minutes of arrival. Many emergency departments have protocols to ensure rapid ECG initiation. Although prompt care is necessary, the ECG serves as a diagnostic tool rather than a life-saving intervention. If all patients with chest pain were assigned ESI level-1, it would hinder the ability to prioritize those who truly need immediate life-saving care. However, a chest pain patient who arrives at triage sweating and with a palpable blood pressure of 80 would meet ESI level-1 criteria.

A third instance of time-critical care involves patients showing symptoms of an acute stroke. If the patient is physiologically stable, a delay of 10 minutes before starting treatment is unlikely to worsen their condition. On the other hand, a stroke patient who cannot maintain their airway qualifies for ESI level 1.

In another scenario, an elderly patient who has fallen and may have a hip fracture arrives with family by private car and is experiencing significant pain. Although the patient does not strictly qualify for ESI level 2, they are clearly uncomfortable. The triage nurse would assign an ESI level 3 and likely prioritize placing the patient in a bed ahead of other ESI level 3 patients. Similar situations can occur with patients arriving by ambulance. However, arriving by ambulance alone does not justify assigning ESI level 1 or 2. Triage level should always be determined using ESI criteria, regardless of how the patient arrived.

Overall, care for ESI level-2 patients should be expedited, with the goal of placing them in the treatment area within 10 minutes. It is crucial to note that although ESI version 4 has broadened level-1 criteria to include patients needing immediate interventions who were previously classified as level 2, all level-2 patients remain potentially very ill and need prompt assessment and care. The triage nurse has determined that it is unsafe for these patients to wait. While they may appear stable at present, their condition could quickly worsen, and timely diagnostic or therapeutic interventions may be critical (for example, a stable patient with chest pain should receive an ECG within 10 minutes of arrival), or they may face a possible major threat to life or organ function. ESI level-2 patients are still regarded as being at very high risk.

Given the current issue of ED overcrowding, it is common for triage nurses to encounter multiple ESI level-2 patients when there are no available ED beds. In these circumstances, there may be a temptation to “undertriage,” which can result in significant harm to patients and inaccurately reflect the ED’s patient population. When several ESI level-2 patients arrive at the same time, the triage nurse should assess each one using the ESI algorithm. This allows the nurse to prioritize among the level-2 patients, identifying those at greatest risk and arranging placement accordingly.

##### Summary

In conclusion, the ESI is a straightforward five-level triage system that categorizes patients according to the severity of their condition and the resources they require. The ESI triage process relies on four main decision points. With this system, an experienced emergency department nurse can quickly and accurately assess and prioritize patients.

### Chapter 4. ESI Level 2

This chapter builds upon the initial overview of the ESI, emphasizing the importance of the experienced ED nurse’s clinical judgment. The ESI triage training program should allocate significant time to clarifying which patients qualify for ESI level 2. Here, we focus on typical patient scenarios that fulfill the criteria for ESI level 2.

Once the triage nurse has established that the patient does not need urgent life-saving care, the next step is to assess whether the patient can wait. In making this judgment, the triage nurse should ask, “Would I allocate my last available bed to this patient?” The three questions outlined in Figure 4-1 must be addressed, as they are essential elements of the ESI level-2 criteria.

Is this considered a high-risk scenario?

2. Has the patient developed recent confusion, drowsiness, or disorientation?

3. Is the patient in significant pain or discomfort?

The rest of this chapter explores the decision-making aspects of ESI level 2 in depth. Numerous examples are included, illustrating potential medical diagnoses linked to patients’ chief complaints and symptoms. An experienced triage nurse will always evaluate the chief complaint, observed signs and symptoms, patient demographics, and medical history to help identify high-risk situations. Although the goal of nurse triage is not to establish a medical diagnosis, these scenarios rely on the triage nurse’s expertise regarding possible diagnoses related to specific complaints. Comprehensive resources on the signs and symptoms of various medical conditions include the Emergency Nursing Core Curriculum[©] and other emergency nursing reference books. The following section highlights selected examples of high-risk situations, though it is not meant to be all-inclusive. These examples are summarized in Table 4-1.

##### High-risk Situations

Recognizing high-risk situations is essential in the triage decision-making process, no matter which triage system is applied. The ESI emphasizes the significance of identifying high-risk cases and relies on the triage nurse’s knowledge and experience to determine which patients are at elevated risk.

There is limited literature on how emergency department (ED) triage nurses make decisions. While knowledge and experience are essential, they are not enough on their own. Another crucial element is intuition or a “sixth sense.” Novice triage nurses should be taught practical guidelines, or rules of thumb, to rely on until they gain the confidence and experience needed for quick, accurate decision-making. Examples of such guidelines include “assume all women of childbearing age are pregnant until proven otherwise” or “consider all chest pain as cardiac in origin until proven otherwise.” New triage nurses are also instructed in symptom clustering, such as recognizing the cardiac cluster of chest pain, nausea, shortness of breath, and sweating. Through previous clinical experiences, ED nurses develop what are called clinical portraits, storing specific patient scenarios in long-term memory. For instance, a nurse will always recall a patient with fever, stiff neck, and a meningococcal rash when encountering a similar case in the future. With each triage situation, nurses must draw upon all their knowledge and experience. Experienced triage nurses should be able to easily recognize high-risk situations.

Vital signs alone are often insufficient for identifying patients at high risk. Patients usually arrive at the emergency department with a main complaint, symptoms, or a history that points to a potentially serious issue that can quickly worsen if not addressed promptly. Factors such as the patient’s age, medical history, and current medications often affect how severe the chief complaint appears. For instance, an elderly, frail individual with intense abdominal pain faces a much greater risk of complications and death compared to a healthy 20-year-old. The older patient with abdominal pain should be assigned an ESI level 2, while the younger adult with stable vital signs is typically given an ESI level 3. Triage nurses frequently recognize high-risk cases, which may then be supported by abnormal vital signs. For example, a patient reporting fever and a productive cough might have a respiratory rate of 32 and an oxygen saturation of 90 percent. An experienced triage nurse can use their knowledge to determine that this patient likely has pneumonia, is at risk for further oxygen desaturation, and is therefore high risk. In contrast, less experienced emergency department nurses may lack the skills to reliably identify high-risk situations and make accurate triage decisions. As a result, an inexperienced triage nurse can be a liability, regardless of the triage system in place. They have not yet developed the ability to use symptom patterns, clinical scenarios, or intuition—essential tools for recognizing high-risk patients. The following section will outline specific examples of high-risk situations.

###### Abdominal and Gastrointestinal

Abdominal pain is a common reason for visits to the emergency department. What factors make it high risk? Taking a thorough history and evaluating the current pain level, respiratory rate, and heart rate are key components that help identify high-risk cases. Pain severity is just one aspect to consider. If severe abdominal pain is accompanied by tachycardia or respiratory distress, this may indicate shock and puts the patient at higher risk. Elderly patients with severe abdominal pain are also at increased risk, as they are more likely to suffer from bowel obstructions, gastrointestinal bleeding, and other abdominal issues that carry greater morbidity and mortality compared to younger individuals. It is crucial to look for signs and symptoms of an acute abdomen in all patients presenting with abdominal pain. Important questions include: How long has the pain been present? What prompted the patient to seek emergency care today? Has the patient experienced significant nausea, vomiting, or diarrhea? Is there evidence of dehydration? Patients who report severe, “tearing” abdominal pain that radiates to the back should be evaluated for a possible abdominal aortic aneurysm. This pain is typically described as intense, constant, and of sudden onset, and these patients may have a history of hypertension.

Patients presenting with abdominal pain are frequently assigned an ESI level 3 at the start of the triage assessment, but if tachycardia or additional risk factors are identified, the triage nurse may conclude that the patient is actually at high risk.

Vomiting blood or presenting with blood per rectum requires careful assessment, taking vital signs into account. A 30-year-old with bright red rectal bleeding, stable vital signs, and no additional risk factors does not qualify for ESI level 2. However, an older adult who called emergency services due to vomiting blood and has a heart rate of 117 and a respiratory rate of 24 is considered high risk and does meet the criteria for ESI level 2.

###### Cardiovascular

Chest pain is a frequent reason for seeking medical care. The symptoms of acute coronary syndromes (ACS) can be vague, making it challenging to assess ACS risk during triage. Patients experiencing chest or upper abdominal discomfort, with or without other symptoms, generally require a prompt ECG to check for ACS and should be considered high risk—classified as ESI level 2. Triage nurses must be aware of how heart disease can present differently, especially in women. For instance, a 54-year-old obese woman arriving at the emergency department with upper abdominal pain and fatigue is at risk for ACS and should be assigned to ESI level 2 as high risk. Patients with chest pain who are unstable and need immediate interventions like intubation or hemodynamic support should be triaged as ESI level 1. Not all chest pain cases fall into level 1 or 2. For example, a healthy 20-year-old with chest pain, cough, and a fever of 101°F is at low risk for ACS and does not meet ESI level 1 or 2 criteria. Each case must be evaluated individually. Other high-risk cardiovascular conditions include possible hypertensive emergencies, acute arterial blockages, and patients with fever following valve replacement surgery.

###### Dental, Ear, Nose, and Throat

While less frequent, epiglottitis still occurs and poses a possible threat to the airway. Patients with peritonsillar abscesses also face potential airway compromise, and both conditions are considered high-risk. If a patient with either issue is at immediate risk of airway obstruction and needs urgent intervention, they meet level-1 criteria. For those presenting with epistaxis, the triage nurse should check blood pressure, even though this step is not included in the ESI algorithm. Causes of epistaxis may include a posterior nosebleed from a hypertensive crisis, nose picking in a patient taking Coumadin®, or recent cocaine use. Regardless of the cause, these patients should be assigned ESI level 2, as they are considered high-risk.

###### Environmental

Individuals with inhalation injuries are at elevated risk for airway obstruction. If a patient exhibits marked airway distress necessitating urgent intervention, they fulfill level-1 criteria.

###### Facial

Individuals who have sustained facial trauma need to be assessed for potential facial fractures. Such fractures frequently occur alongside other serious injuries and can result in airway obstruction, making it essential to classify these cases as high risk. If facial trauma leads to actual airway compromise, the patient should be assigned an ESI level 1 to ensure prompt airway intervention. Cases with a significant risk of airway compromise should be triaged as ESI level 2.

###### General Medical

A number of other general medical issues should be evaluated for potential high-risk scenarios. These complications include diabetic ketoacidosis, abnormal blood sugar levels (either high or low), sepsis, episodes of fainting or near-fainting, and various electrolyte imbalances that may require urgent intervention. Hyperkalemia, in particular, poses a significant risk as it can cause dangerous heart rhythm disturbances. This condition should be considered in dialysis patients who present with weakness. Additionally, cancer patients receiving chemotherapy who develop a fever are at increased risk for sepsis and must be recognized as high risk and assessed promptly.

###### Genitourinary

Men experiencing testicular torsion typically report intense pain, are readily identifiable, and need prompt assessment, surgical treatment, and immediate pain management. Patients on renal dialysis who cannot finish their treatment also represent a high-risk genitourinary emergency due to the potential for multiple electrolyte imbalances. Both women and, more frequently, men may arrive at triage with sudden urinary retention. Men over 65 often present with benign prostatic hypertrophy leading to an inability to urinate. Postoperative urinary retention can occur in both men and women. These individuals are in significant distress and require urgent urinary catheterization. Such cases involve patients in severe discomfort and should be classified as ESI level 2.

###### Mental Health

Patients presenting with mental health issues are considered high risk if they pose a threat to themselves, others, or their surroundings. Individuals who are suicidal, homicidal, psychotic, violent, or at risk of fleeing should be classified as high risk. Intoxication alone, without evidence of trauma or risk of aspiration, does not qualify as high risk. However, intoxicated patients should be thoroughly evaluated for trauma or behavioral concerns linked to alcohol use or their medical history. If either is present, the situation may be high risk, and the patient should be assigned an ESI level 2.

###### Neurological

Patients experiencing severe headaches along with changes in mental status, elevated blood pressure, lethargy, fever, or a rash should be regarded as high risk. Additionally, any individual who suddenly develops speech difficulties or motor weakness should be categorized as ESI level 2. These symptoms may indicate an acute stroke, making prompt assessment essential. The time elapsed since symptom onset is a key consideration in selecting treatment options, especially for fibrinolytic or other interventions. If a patient with no prior history of headaches arrives at the emergency department with a sudden headache, they should be considered at high risk for a subarachnoid hemorrhage. Such patients often recall the exact activity they were engaged in when the headache started, commonly after lifting, having a bowel movement, or during sexual activity.

###### Obstetrical and Gynecological

Women presenting with abdominal pain or vaginal bleeding should be thoroughly evaluated, and vital signs should be recorded unless there is an immediate life-threatening condition. For all women of reproductive age, it is essential to obtain a pregnancy history and determine the date of the last menstrual period. The triage nurse should look for symptoms of abruptio placentae and placenta previa in women who are in late pregnancy. In early pregnancy, assessment should focus on identifying signs of ectopic pregnancy and spontaneous abortion. Pregnant patients who are between 14 and 20 weeks gestation or further along should be promptly evaluated by a physician, following the specific guidelines of the institution. Postpartum women who report heavy vaginal bleeding should also receive urgent medical attention from a physician. Any woman, whether pregnant or postpartum, who exhibits significant hemodynamic instability and requires immediate life-saving measures should be assigned an ESI level 1 during triage.

###### Ocular

Patients who experience eye trauma, sudden partial or complete vision loss, or chemical exposure to the eye are at significant risk for lasting eye damage and should be assigned to ESI level 2 triage. Visual loss can be caused by conditions such as central retinal artery occlusion, acute narrow-angle glaucoma, and retinal detachment. Eye injuries may lead to globe rupture or hyphema. Chemical exposures, especially from alkali substances, require prompt eye irrigation to minimize corneal injury. Each of these situations demands urgent assessment and intervention to avoid further harm or worsening of the condition. These cases fulfill the requirements for ESI level 2. Although immediate eye irrigation is crucial, it is not classified as a life-saving measure, so these patients do not qualify for ESI level 1.

###### Orthopedic

Patients exhibiting signs and symptoms of compartment syndrome face a significant risk of losing the affected limb and should be categorized as ESI level 2. Other orthopedic injuries considered high-risk include any limb injury with impaired neurovascular status, partial or complete amputations, or injuries resulting from mechanisms known to be high-risk, such as severe acceleration or deceleration. Patients suspected of having fractures of the pelvis, femur, or hip, as well as those with other limb dislocations, require thorough assessment and monitoring of vital signs. These types of fractures may lead to substantial blood loss. If a patient is hemodynamically unstable and requires immediate life-saving intervention, they should be classified as ESI level 1.

###### Pediatrics

Triage nurses often feel uneasy when determining the acuity level for pediatric patients, particularly infants. Gathering a precise history from the caregiver and assessing the child’s activity are crucial steps. A child who cannot be comforted or appears withdrawn may be at significant risk for severe illness. The conditions listed below illustrate high-risk scenarios in children:

Convulsions.

Severe dehydration and sepsis.

A complication of diabetes known as diabetic ketoacidosis.

Abuse of children, burn injuries.

Injury to the head.

Overdoses or ingestion of vitamins, iron, or other substances.

An infant younger than 28 days old who has a temperature of 100.4° F (38° C) or higher.

###### Transplant

Patients who have undergone organ transplantation are typically unwell and classified as high risk. They may develop organ rejection, sepsis, or other complications. Individuals awaiting transplantation are also generally regarded as high risk.

###### Respiratory

Numerous respiratory issues can put patients at significant risk. Those experiencing mild to moderate distress should undergo further assessment of their respiratory rate and pulse oximetry to decide if they should be classified as ESI level 2. Patients exhibiting severe respiratory distress who need immediate life-saving measures, such as intubation, qualify for level-1 categorization. A high-risk patient is someone who is currently breathing and oxygenating sufficiently but is in respiratory distress and could quickly worsen. Causes of respiratory distress may include asthma, pulmonary embolism, pleural effusion, pneumothorax, inhalation of a foreign object, exposure to toxic smoke, or shortness of breath accompanied by chest pain.

###### Toxicological

The majority of patients presenting with an overdose require prompt assessment, as these cases are considered high risk. Identifying the specific substances ingested and their amounts is frequently challenging. If the overdose was intentional and the patient expresses suicidal thoughts, this also qualifies as a high-risk scenario. Patients who arrive without breathing or need urgent lifesaving measures should be assigned ESI level 1, while all other admitted overdose cases should be classified as ESI level 2.

###### Trauma

Patients who have experienced a traumatic event are often at significant risk for injury, even if no visible injuries are present. Any injury mechanism that carries a high risk should be classified as ESI level 2, unless the patient has unstable vital signs and needs immediate intervention, in which case they should be assigned ESI level 1. Serious injuries occur due to the transfer of mechanical or kinetic energy, typically from acceleration, deceleration, or both. Examples include motor vehicle and motorcycle accidents, falls, and gunshot or stab wounds, all of which involve blunt or penetrating trauma and require thorough assessment for possible severe injury. The triage nurse should gather information such as the patient’s age, any pre-existing medical conditions, environmental factors, the height of a fall or jump, the speed of the vehicle involved, any history of loss of consciousness, the site of a penetrating injury, and the type of weapon used. The nurse will use their understanding of biomechanics and injury mechanisms to evaluate the patient and determine if they meet ESI level 2 criteria. Gunshot wounds to the head, neck, chest, or groin generally necessitate trauma team involvement and immediate care, and should be triaged as ESI level 1.

###### Wound Management

What factors classify a wound as high risk? Is there ongoing, uncontrolled bleeding? Is there evidence of arterial bleeding? Does the injury involve a partial amputation? How did the wound occur, and does the cause put the patient at increased risk for additional traumatic issues? The majority of wounds do not qualify for ESI level 2. For example, a patient with a stab wound to the thigh that only affects the subcutaneous tissue, has bleeding under control, and maintains good neurological function in the limb can be assigned to ESI level 4. However, any wound with uncontrolled bleeding that demands immediate, lifesaving action to stabilize the patient falls under level 1 criteria.

##### Confusion/Lethargy/ Disorientation

The second consideration when assessing if a patient qualifies for level-2 criteria is whether they are experiencing new confusion, lethargy, or disorientation. Changes in mental status are also a common primary complaint. These patients may arrive at the emergency department with family, friends, or paramedics. At decision point B in the ESI algorithm, confusion, lethargy, or disorientation refers specifically to a recent or sudden change in the patient’s level of consciousness. Ongoing dementia or chronic confusion does not satisfy the requirements for ESI level 2. Acute confusion, lethargy, or disorientation can result from several serious medical issues, such as stroke, transient ischemic attack, other structural brain abnormalities, metabolic or electrolyte disturbances like hypoglycemia or hyponatremia, and toxicological problems.

This part of the algorithm is typically straightforward and offers minimal room for misinterpretation. When a patient arrives at triage with an unknown medical history and is confused, lethargic, or disoriented, the triage nurse should presume these symptoms are new and assign the patient to ESI level 2. However, if the patient exhibits new confusion, lethargy, or disorientation and needs an immediate life-saving intervention as outlined earlier, they should be categorized as ESI level 1.

##### Severe Pain/Distress

The last consideration in deciding if the patient qualifies for level-2 is whether they are experiencing severe pain or distress. The patient must be evaluated for signs of significant pain or distress. Any patient reporting a pain score of 7 out of 10 or higher should be evaluated for ESI level-2 criteria.

The word "considered" holds significant importance. It is ultimately the triage nurse’s judgment to decide if the combination of the patient’s clinical condition and pain score justifies assigning an ESI level 2. For instance, a patient whose toe was struck by a heavy metal object might report their pain as 10 out of 10. The patient could indeed have a fracture and be in intense pain, and may not have attempted any pain relief before arriving at the emergency department. In this scenario, the appropriate triage level would be ESI level 4, as only one resource—an x-ray—will be required. The triage nurse should provide comfort measures at triage, such as ice, elevating the foot, and administering pain medication if protocols allow, to help alleviate the pain. The nurse should accept the patient’s report of 10/10 pain and address it during triage. Nevertheless, this patient can safely wait to be seen, and you would not allocate your last available bed to them. In conclusion, the triage nurse evaluates not just the patient’s reported pain level, but also considers the main complaint, medical history, and the patient’s physical presentation when assigning a triage category. Patients for whom severe pain could justify an ESI level 2 rating include:

A patient experiencing severe (10/10) flank pain and visibly writhing during triage.

An 80-year-old woman experiencing generalized abdominal pain rated 7 out of 10, accompanied by intense nausea.

A 30-year-old individual experiencing an acute pain crisis due to sickle cell disease.

A cancer patient experiencing intense pain.

Any burn, whether full- or partial-thickness, that necessitates prompt pain management.

All emergency department patients should be evaluated for pain and asked to rate their pain using a tool like the visual analog scale. Many triage nurses feel uneasy about recording a patient’s pain score and then having the patient wait to be seen. It is crucial for triage nurses to recognize that a patient’s self-reported pain score is just one aspect of the overall pain assessment. For instance, triage nurses often encounter patients who appear comfortable—such as laughing, talking on the phone, or eating—yet claim their pain is 10 or higher. Triage nurses should assign an ESI level 2 if a patient reports a pain score of 7 out of 10 or more and the nurse’s subjective and objective evaluation indicates that the pain requires interventions beyond what can be provided during triage. In such cases, the triage nurse determines that it would not be appropriate for the patient to wait and assigns them to the last available bed.

Ultimately, when deciding if a patient qualifies for ESI level-2, the triage nurse needs to evaluate for severe distress, which can be either physiological or psychological. Beyond pain, patients with significant respiratory distress fulfill the physiological criteria for ESI level 2. Severe psychological distress may be seen in patients who are:

Overwhelmed with distress following a sexual assault.

Displaying disruptive behavior during triage.

Aggressive.

Individuals who have experienced domestic abuse.

Undergoing an intense response to grief.

These patients are typically prioritized by the triage nurse to be taken directly to the treatment area, allowing them to bypass the waiting room.

##### Summary

We have examined the essential elements and questions required to assess if a patient qualifies for ESI level-2. It is vital for the triage nurse to take these questions into account when evaluating every patient. Overlooking a high-risk scenario could lead to longer wait times and possibly adverse outcomes for the patient.

### Chapter 5. Expected Resource Needs

Historically, triage systems have relied exclusively on assessing the severity of a patient’s condition. In these systems, nurses determine an acuity level by judging how long a patient can safely wait before being evaluated by a healthcare provider. The Emergency Severity Index (ESI) introduces a different method by not only prioritizing who should be seen first, but also, for patients with lower acuity, estimating the resources that will likely be required to reach a clinical decision. This chapter provides background on the rationale for incorporating resource prediction into the ESI, explains what is considered a resource, and offers examples of patients classified as ESI levels 3 to 5 along with the anticipated resources each will need.

Traditionally, comprehensive triage has served as the primary approach for assigning triage acuity in U.S. emergency departments (Emergency Nurses Association [ENA], 1997, pp. 3-10; Gilboy, Travers & Wuerz, 1999). These triage systems rely on the nurse’s evaluation of vital signs, both subjective and objective data, medical history, allergies, and current medications to establish the level of triage acuity.

Predicting resource needs is a key component of the ESI for patients categorized as ESI level 3, 4, or 5. It is essential to note that resource allocation is not considered for high-acuity patients, such as those at ESI level 1 or 2. Resource prediction sets the ESI apart from other triage systems that focus solely on acuity. When Drs. Wuerz and Eitel developed the ESI triage system, they incorporated resource utilization to provide additional information and enable more precise triage decisions. They believed that experienced emergency department (ED) triage nurses could anticipate the types and quantities of tests, treatments, and consultations a patient would require during their ED visit. This has been confirmed by recent studies on ESI implementation and validation, which have demonstrated that triage nurses can accurately predict the resource needs of ED patients (Eitel, Travers, Rosenau, Gilboy & Wuerz, 2003; Tanabe, Gimbel, Yarnold & Adams, 2004). One such study, conducted across seven EDs in diverse geographic locations, including both urban and rural settings as well as academic and community hospitals, found that nurses using the ESI correctly predicted the number of resources needed by ED patients 70 percent of the time. In other words, experienced triage nurses using the ESI can reliably estimate at triage how many resources a patient will need to reach a disposition in the ED, and, more importantly, can distinguish between patients who will require low versus high resource intensity. This ability to differentiate based on resource needs enables more efficient patient flow at ED presentation by directing patients into appropriate operational pathways, facilitating parallel processing. Additionally, research has shown that ESI triage levels are associated with significant patient outcomes, such as admission and mortality rates (Eitel et al., 2003).

It is important to remember that resource prediction applies solely to patients who are less acutely ill. At decision points A and B in the ESI algorithm (Figure 5-1), the nurse determines if patients qualify for ESI levels 1 or 2 based exclusively on their acuity. In contrast, at decision point C, the nurse assigns ESI levels 3 through 5 by evaluating both the patient’s acuity and anticipated resource requirements. Therefore, the triage nurse takes resource needs into account only when the responses to decision points A and B are “no.”

To determine what resources an ED patient may require, the triage nurse should have a broad understanding of emergency department care standards and, more specifically, know what is considered reasonable and typical emergency care. A simple way to approach this is to consider, “Based on this patient’s main complaint, which resources are emergency providers most likely to use?”

The triage nurse relies on information gathered from a brief subjective and objective triage assessment, along with details such as past medical history, current medications, age, and gender, to estimate how many different resources the ED provider will require to make a decision about the patient’s care. For instance, a healthy teenager with a straightforward leg laceration and no significant medical history would likely need just one resource: suturing. Conversely, an elderly patient with several chronic conditions and no prior episodes of dizziness who arrives with a head laceration after a fall will obviously require multiple resources, such as suturing, laboratory tests, ECG, imaging, or specialist consultations. Proper application of ESI triage depends on the nurse’s ability to anticipate resource needs, making it a task best suited for an experienced emergency nurse. Overall, regardless of the triage system in place, we maintain that triage should be conducted by a skilled emergency nurse to ensure patient safety.

Table 5-1 (also referenced as Table 3-1) outlines the criteria for classifying resources within the ESI triage system. The distinction between ESI levels 3, 4, and 5 is based on the nurse’s assessment of the number of resources a patient will require for disposition. According to the triage nurse’s judgment, patients anticipated to need no resources are assigned to level 5, those expected to need one resource are placed in level 4, and patients likely to require two or more resources are categorized as ESI level 3. Research has shown that patients needing two or more resources experience higher rates of hospital admission, increased mortality, and longer emergency department stays (Eitel et al., 2003; Tanabe et al., 2004 Reliability and validity).

While Table 5-1 does not include every possible resource, it offers general direction regarding the types of diagnostic tests, procedures, and treatments that are considered resources within the ESI system. Emergency nurses using the ESI should avoid focusing too much on the specific definitions of each resource. The key point is that ESI only requires the triage nurse to estimate the resources a patient will likely need during their ED visit. Table 5-1 lists the most frequently used resources, but compiling an exhaustive list of all potential ED resources is neither feasible nor required. For accurate ESI assignment, it is sufficient to determine whether a patient will need no resources, one resource, or two or more resources. Once a triage nurse identifies two likely resources, further estimation is unnecessary. The main purpose of the ESI resource component is to distinguish patients with more complex, resource-intensive needs from those with simpler issues. For ESI triage, resources are defined as interventions that go beyond a basic exam or minor interventions by ED staff, or that involve personnel outside the ED. Resources that demand significant ED staff time (such as administering IV medications or inserting a chest tube) or require assistance from outside departments (like radiology for x-rays or surgical consultations) tend to increase the patient’s length of stay in the ED and reflect a higher level of patient complexity and triage priority.

There are frequently asked questions regarding what qualifies as an ESI resource. One common question concerns how many blood or urine tests and x-rays count as a resource. According to the ESI triage system, the triage nurse should consider the number of different types of resources required to decide the patient’s disposition, rather than counting each individual test.

A complete blood count (CBC) and an electrolyte panel together make up a single laboratory test resource.

A complete blood count and a chest x-ray are two types of resources (laboratory test and imaging).

A CBC and a urinalysis are both laboratory tests, and when performed together, they are considered a single resource.

A chest x-ray and standard skull radiographs are one type of resource (x-ray).

Cervical spine X-rays and a head CT scan are two imaging resources (an X-ray and a CT scan).

Another commonly debated resource is the use of a splint, which is not considered a resource. If it were, patients with ankle sprains would be classified as ESI level 3 (requiring an x-ray and splint). Although applying a splint can require significant effort, it’s important to remember that resource prediction is solely intended to categorize patients and ensure they are directed to the appropriate area of the emergency department. In many emergency departments, ESI level-3 patients are not suitable for fast track or urgent care sections. Triage scores do not reflect the overall intensity of nursing workload.

Another frequently asked question about ESI resources concerns the inclusion of eye irrigation as a resource. Patients who experience a chemical splash to the eye are typically classified as ESI level-2 due to the high-risk nature of their injury, so the need for eye irrigation does not influence their ESI level. On the other hand, if the eye issue is caused by dust particles, the patient is not automatically considered high risk. In such cases, eye irrigation is counted as a resource, placing the patient at ESI level-4. Performing an eye exam is not considered a resource since it is part of the standard physical examination. Additional questions about resources are answered in Chapter 5’s Frequently Asked Questions section in Appendix A.

Clinicians often ask about the items categorized as “not resources” in Table 5-1. This list is designed to help triage nurses efficiently and accurately assign patients to one of five clinically distinct levels (Wuerz, Milne, Eitel, Travers & Gilboy, 2000). Items considered not to be resources include physical examinations, point-of-care testing, and procedures that generally do not increase a patient’s length of stay in the emergency department or suggest greater complexity. Because it is standard practice for all ED patients to receive a basic history and physical exam, these assessments—including pelvic exams—are not counted as resources for ESI classification. The strength of the ESI lies in its straightforwardness; the main aim of identifying resources is to distinguish patients with more complex needs who require two or more resources (level 3 or higher) from those with less complicated issues who will likely need fewer than two resources (level 4 or 5). Emergency nurses should avoid overcomplicating the ESI by focusing too much on the specifics of resource definitions. In most cases, a patient will need either no resources, one resource, or two or more resources.

Although resource use can differ depending on the location, provider, or even the individual patient, triage nurses are encouraged to base their ESI resource predictions on the typical management of the most frequent presenting issues. Ideally, any patient arriving at an emergency department should require roughly the same resources for similar complaints. For instance, if an 82-year-old nursing home resident with an indwelling urinary catheter presents with fever and cough, the provider will likely request blood and urine tests along with a chest x-ray. The triage nurse can reasonably anticipate that this patient will need two or more resources and should therefore assign an ESI level 3.

While there may be slight differences in procedures among various emergency departments, these usually do not significantly impact the triage rating. For instance, some departments perform pregnancy tests within the ED (which is not considered a resource by ESI), while others send the tests to the lab (which is considered a resource by ESI). However, it is uncommon for patients to require only a pregnancy test, as most will need at least one additional resource. One operational difference that could lead to varying ESI levels is how patients with a sole complaint of sore throat are managed. In some hospitals, throat cultures are routinely taken (counted as one resource, ESI level 4), whereas in others, they are not (no resources, ESI level 5). Another example involves the application of the Ottawa Ankle Rules, which are evidence-based guidelines to decide if an ankle x-ray is necessary for injury. The extent to which institutions implement these rules differs, and those that use them at triage may order fewer x-rays compared to those that do not regularly apply the rules.

Temperature is a key factor in evaluating the allocation of resources for infants and young children. This topic will be discussed in Chapter 6.

Clinically, patients classified as ESI level 4 and 5 can wait several hours before being seen by a provider. However, from a customer service perspective, these patients may be more appropriately managed in a fast-track or urgent care environment. Mid-level practitioners with the right skill set and supervision are capable of treating level-4 and 5 patients. The ESI system also offers an operational benefit, as level-5 patients can occasionally be accommodated for a quick assessment and disposition by a provider, even when the department is full. Frequently, triage policies specify that ESI level-4 or 5 patients may be directed to an urgent care or fast-track area.

In conclusion, the ESI introduces a novel method for emergency department triage by incorporating predictions regarding the number of resources required to determine patient disposition. For patients classified as ESI levels 3, 4, and 5, the assignment of triage level takes resource needs into account, whereas decisions for ESI levels 1 and 2 rely solely on the severity of the patient’s condition. Table 5-2 provides examples of patients in ESI levels 3, 4, and 5. In practice, estimating resource needs has proven highly useful for managing the large volume of patients presenting with non-acute issues.

### Chapter 6.The Role of Vital Signs in ESI Triage

##### Introduction Figure 6-1. Danger Zone Vital Signs

This chapter centers on decision point D, which involves evaluating the patient's vital signs. By this stage in the ESI algorithm, the triage nurse has already established that the patient does not qualify for ESI level 1 or 2 and will need two or more resources. This means the patient is at least an ESI level 3. At this juncture, the nurse reviews the patient’s vital signs, including heart rate, respiratory rate, and oxygen saturation, and, for children under three, temperature. If any of the vital signs fall within the danger zone limits (as shown in decision point D, Figure 6-1), the nurse should seriously consider upgrading the patient’s triage level from 3 to 2.

In the ESI triage training program, significant time should be allocated to discussing how vital signs impact the decision to upgrade a patient from ESI level 3 to level 2. It is important to emphasize that the experienced triage nurse is ultimately responsible for determining if a patient qualifies for ESI level 2, taking into account the patient’s medical history, current medications, and both subjective and objective assessments, including overall appearance. This determination relies on the nurse’s clinical judgment and understanding of normal vital sign ranges for all age groups, as well as the effects of factors like medications, medical history, and pain level.

##### What Are Vital Signs?

Vital signs are typically basic measurements of physiological functions such as temperature, blood pressure, pulse, respiratory rate, and pulse oximetry (refer to Table 6-1). These measurements often guide healthcare professionals in making clinical decisions. In recent years, nursing literature has increasingly highlighted the significance of pain, with the American Pain Society coining the term “Pain: the fifth vital sign” to raise awareness about the need for thorough pain assessment and management. Evaluating pain is a key part of the ESI and is actually considered earlier in its process. Specifically for ESI, heart rate, respiratory rate, oxygen saturation, and temperature in children under three years old are the vital sign parameters used at decision point D. Vital signs provide objective information that helps determine a patient’s general health status and viability. The readings we collect shape our understanding of a patient’s overall condition and influence our diagnostic and treatment decisions. Nevertheless, vital signs alone do not offer a complete assessment of a patient’s state. They can be influenced by various factors, including prescription drugs, herbal supplements, and recreational substances. For instance, beta-blockers can cause a slower heart rate and mask the typical increase in heart rate seen in shock. Elderly patients with hypothyroidism may present with low body temperature, even during severe infections like sepsis. Similarly, a young adult’s high temperature might be due to recreational drug use.

Vital signs are fluctuating, dynamic markers that supplement a patient’s assessment. Their measurement can depend on the person taking them, and what is considered a normal vital sign can differ based on the source referenced. Even in optimal circumstances, vital signs may not always be dependable or precise (Edmonds, Mower, Lovato & Lomeli, 2002). Often, the patient’s overall appearance and clinical context are most informative. Nevertheless, if a triage nurse believes that knowing a patient’s vital signs would assist in evaluating risk, then they should be recorded. For instance, if a patient is on immunosuppressive drugs, undergoing chemotherapy, or is immunocompromised due to a condition like AIDS, it is important to check their body temperature.

##### Are Vital Signs Necessary at Triage?

Before the introduction of five-level triage in the United States, it was customary for every patient arriving at an emergency department to have their vital signs measured prior to being assigned a triage level. Vital signs were viewed as a crucial part of the initial nursing evaluation and frequently served as a basis for decision-making. In the traditional three-level triage system, vital signs played a key role in determining how long a patient could safely wait for care; if vital signs were normal, patients were often allowed to wait longer. As a result, vital signs historically carried significant weight in triage assessments, sometimes more so than the patient’s clinical presentation.

In recent years, updated triage models have recommended the selective use of vital signs during triage (Gilboy, Travers & Wuerz, 2000). Collecting initial vital signs is not a required part of other five-level triage systems and is generally not performed during the triage of level-1 or level-2 patients, who are the most critically ill. For instance, the Guidelines for Implementation of the Australasian Triage Scale in Emergency Departments specify that “vital signs should only be measured at triage if required to estimate urgency, or if time permits” (Australasian College for Emergency Medicine, 2000). Likewise, the Canadian Triage and Acuity Scale (CTAS) states that vital signs are only needed if they are essential for determining the triage level, particularly for levels 3, 4, and 5, and only if time allows (Beveridge et al., 2002). The Manchester Triage Group incorporates specific vital sign criteria as decision points within its flow chart, using these parameters as one of several factors to help the triage nurse determine the patient’s acuity level.

Vital signs are not always the best method for determining triage acuity. Some research indicates that taking vital signs may not be essential during the initial triage assessment. In 2002, Cooper, Flaherty, Lin, and Hubbell studied how vital signs affect triage status, also taking into account factors like age and the ability to communicate. Their study involved over 14,000 patients across 24 emergency departments in the United States. The findings showed that vital signs altered the triage acuity level in only 8% of cases. When looking at specific age groups, children aged 2 or younger experienced the greatest change in triage decisions, with an 11.4% difference after vital signs were obtained.

##### Vital Signs and ESI Triage

With ESI triage, the only mandatory situation for checking vital signs is for patients who do not initially qualify as ESI level 1 or 2, but are expected to require two or more resources. For patients assigned to ESI levels 1, 2, 4, or 5, taking vital signs at triage is optional and left to the triage nurse’s judgment. Although the ESI system does not mandate vital sign assessment for every patient at triage, individual institutions may have their own protocols. Hospital policies on vital sign assessment at triage are shaped by factors like staffing, patient mix, and available resources, which are not addressed in this handbook. Generally, it is always acceptable to take vital signs when triaging a stable patient. According to ESI, vital signs are only required for level-3 patients. (Refer to Table 6-2)

The creators of the ESI and the current research team agree that experienced emergency department nurses can use vital sign information to supplement their clinical judgment when assigning ESI ratings to patients. However, there is limited evidence linking abnormal vital signs to emergency department acuity or confirming that these abnormalities reliably indicate serious illness. The ESI has been updated over time to incorporate new evidence and recommendations from the literature. Initially, the ESI working group relied on systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS) research (Rangel-Frausto et al., 1995) to develop the danger zone vital sign criteria and related footnotes. The first ESI version used SIRS criteria, including a heart rate over 90 in adults, as a definitive reason to upgrade a patient from ESI level 3 to level 2 (Wuerz, Milne, Eitel, Travers & Gilboy, 2000). Since the SIRS studies focused on mortality predictors in intensive care unit patients, and these criteria produced too many false positives among ED patients in the initial ESI hospitals, the heart rate threshold was raised to 100 in ESI version 2. Nurses were then advised to consider upgrading adult patients with heart rates above 100 to ESI level 2 (Wuerz et al., 2001; Gilboy, Tanabe, Travers, Eitel & Wuerz, 2003). Pediatric vital sign parameters were also added to the danger zone vital signs criteria.

When applying ESI as a triage method, it is not required to assess vital signs in the triage area for patients who are promptly assigned to level 1 or 2. If a patient appears unstable or has a primary complaint that demands immediate intervention, they should be quickly moved to the treatment area. In such cases, the resuscitation team will obtain and monitor vital signs at the bedside. This includes patients whose clinical presentation suggests a high risk or an urgent need for cardiovascular or respiratory support, such as those who look pale, sweaty, or cyanotic. Nevertheless, the triage nurse may choose to check vital signs in the triage area if there is no available bed or if they believe that vital sign data could help determine the correct triage level. Some patients may only be recognized as ESI level 1 after their vital signs are measured. For instance, an elderly patient who is awake and alert but complains of dizziness may be found to have a critical condition if their heart rate is discovered to be 32 or 180 during the assessment.

As outlined in the ESI algorithm in Chapter 3, when patients do not qualify for ESI level-1 or 2, the triage nurse proceeds to decision point C. At this stage, the nurse evaluates how many resources the patient is likely to require in the emergency department. If only one or no resources are anticipated, the patient can be categorized as ESI level 4 or 5, and a vital sign check is not needed. However, if two or more resources are expected to be necessary, the nurse moves to decision point D, where vital signs should be measured. Vital signs are particularly significant for some patients during triage, especially those assigned to ESI level 3, as their values can provide additional evidence of possible serious illness. If any vital signs fall within the danger zone, it is advised that the triage nurse consider upgrading the patient’s triage level from 3 to 2.

The ESI triage system specifically incorporates heart rate, respiratory rate, and oxygen saturation (for patients who may have respiratory issues) as vital signs. Temperature is only factored in for children younger than three years old. Notably, abnormal blood pressure is not part of the ESI algorithm. However, this does not imply that triage nurses should avoid measuring blood pressure or temperature in older children or adults; rather, these measurements are not typically used to determine the correct triage acuity level.

##### Vital Signs and Pediatric Fever

In this edition of the ESI Handbook, version 4 (v.4) of the ESI algorithm has been revised to reflect updated pediatric fever guidelines. As illustrated in Figure 6-2, note D of the ESI algorithm specifically covers pediatric fever in the context of ESI triage. This part includes guidance from the American College of Emergency Physicians’ Clinical Policy for Children Under Three Years Old Presenting to the Emergency Department With Fever (ACEP, 2003).

The ESI Triage Research Team advises that vital signs should be checked in patients younger than 3 years old during triage. Specifically, taking a temperature is crucial for all children from birth up to 36 months, and assessing vital signs is a key part of evaluating any infant under 36 months with a known fever (Baraff, 2000). This process helps distinguish between ESI level-2 and level-3 patients and reduces the chance that children who may have bacteremia are directed to express care or face an inappropriate delay. Keep in mind that any patient who is in immediate danger or at high risk will be categorized as ESI level 1 or 2.

Table 6-3 offers guidance for triage nurses on using the ESI to evaluate febrile children and select the most suitable triage level. Fever is commonly defined as a rectal temperature above 38.0° C (100.4° F) (Baraff et al., 1993; ACEP, 2003). Infants younger than 28 days with a fever should be regarded as high risk and given at least an ESI level 2. For infants aged 28 days to 3 months, there are no definitive guidelines. The ESI research team advises triage nurses to follow their hospital’s protocols. It is recommended that nurses consider assigning at least an ESI level 2 to these patients.

In version 4 of the ESI, we have adopted a different set of guidelines for managing fever in children aged 3 to 36 months. These guidelines focus on children with high fevers, defined as a temperature above 39.0° C (102.2° F) (ACEP, 2003). When evaluating a highly febrile child in this age group, the triage nurse should determine the child’s immunization status and whether there is a clear source for the fever. If the child is not fully immunized or if no source for the fever can be identified, the child should be categorized as at least ESI level 3. If the child’s immunizations are current and there is an identifiable cause for the fever, an ESI level of 4 or 5 is suitable. For instance, a 7-month-old who is under pediatric care, has received the Haemophilus influenza type b (HIB) vaccine, and presents with a fever while tugging at his ear could be assigned to ESI level 5.

##### Case Examples

The case studies below illustrate how vital signs information is utilized during ESI triage.

A healthy-appearing 28-year-old woman states, “My doctor said I’m approximately 6 weeks pregnant, and I believe I might be having a miscarriage.” She reports, “I began spotting this morning and am now experiencing cramping.” She has no allergies or past medical history and is taking prenatal vitamins. Her vital signs are: temperature 98°F, heart rate 112, respiratory rate 22, and blood pressure 90/60.

This patient qualifies for an upgrade from level 3 to level 2 triage due to her vital signs. Her elevated heart rate and respiratory rate, along with low blood pressure, are worrisome. These symptoms may suggest internal hemorrhage caused by a ruptured ectopic pregnancy.

The mother of a 15-month-old reports that her baby has been experiencing diarrhea since the previous day. She mentions that everyone in the family has recently had the gastrointestinal virus that is circulating. The baby has shown reduced appetite, a mild fever, and several episodes of watery stools. The child is calmly sitting on the mother’s lap. The triage nurse observes indications of dehydration. There is no past medical history, no known drug allergies, and the baby is not on any medications. Vital signs are: temperature 100.4°F, heart rate 142, respiratory rate 48, and blood pressure 76/50.

This patient qualifies for at least ESI level 3. He will need laboratory tests and intravenous fluids as resources. Given his vital signs, the triage nurse may escalate him to ESI level 2. In an infant of this age, both heart rate and respiratory rate exceed the normal limits.

A 57-year-old woman states, “I need to see a doctor about my cough. I can’t seem to get rid of it. I barely slept last night because I was coughing so much, and now I’m extremely tired.” She mentions having a fever of 101° last night and is producing yellow sputum when she coughs. Her medical history includes a hysterectomy three years ago; she is not on any medications but is allergic to Penicillin. Her vital signs are: temperature 101.4°, respiratory rate 28, heart rate 100, and oxygen saturation 90 percent.

At the start of her triage evaluation, this patient appears to possibly have pneumonia. She is likely to require two or more resources, but her low oxygen levels and rapid breathing are worrisome. Based on her vital signs, the triage nurse should upgrade her to an ESI level 2.

A 34-year-old obese woman arrives at triage with complaints of diffuse abdominal pain rated 6 out of 10, ongoing for the past two days. She reports multiple episodes of vomiting and notes that her last bowel movement was three days ago. Her medical history includes back surgery; she is not on any medications and has a peanut allergy. Her vital signs are: temperature 97.8°F, heart rate 104, respiratory rate 16, blood pressure 132/80, and oxygen saturation 99%.

This patient will require at least two resources, such as laboratory tests, intravenous fluids, possibly IV medication for nausea, and a CT scan. The triage nurse should assess the patient’s vital signs, paying attention to the heart rate. Although the heart rate is slightly outside the normal range for the patient’s age, this may be attributed to pain or physical activity. Therefore, the appropriate action is to categorize the patient as ESI level 3.

A crying 9-year-old arrives at triage with her mother after slipping on an icy sidewalk and hurting her right forearm. The forearm appears clearly deformed, but circulation, sensation, and movement are intact. According to her mother, the child has no allergies, is not on any medications, and is otherwise healthy. Her vital signs are: blood pressure 100/68, heart rate 124, respiratory rate 32, and oxygen saturation 99 percent.

The child is in pain from her fall and is clearly distressed. She will need at least two resources: an x-ray and an orthopedic consultation, and possibly conscious sedation. Although her heart rate and breathing are increased, the triage nurse can confidently assign her to ESI level 3. The changes in her vital signs are most likely caused by pain and emotional upset.

A 72-year-old woman arrives at the emergency department using nasal cannula oxygen for her advanced COPD. She tells the triage nurse that she has an infected cat bite on her left hand, which appears red, swollen, and tender. She has no other health issues, uses albuterol as needed, and takes a daily aspirin. She has no known drug allergies. Her vital signs are: temperature 99.6°F, heart rate 88, respiratory rate 22, blood pressure 138/80, and oxygen saturation 91%. She reports no difficulty breathing.

This patient needs at least two resources: laboratory tests and intravenous antibiotics. She qualifies for ESI level 3. Although the triage nurse observes that her oxygen saturation and respiratory rate fall outside the normal adult range, the patient has advanced COPD. Therefore, these vital signs are not worrisome, and she will remain at ESI level 3 without being up-triaged.

##### Case Examples

The case studies below illustrate how vital signs information is utilized during ESI triage.

A healthy-appearing 28-year-old woman states, “My doctor said I’m around 6 weeks pregnant, and now I believe I might be having a miscarriage.” She reports that she began spotting earlier today and is now experiencing cramping. She has no allergies or past medical history and is taking prenatal vitamins. Her vital signs are: temperature 98°F, heart rate 112, respiratory rate 22, and blood pressure 90/60.

This patient qualifies for an upgrade from level 3 to level 2 triage due to her vital signs. Her elevated heart rate and respiratory rate, along with low blood pressure, are worrisome. These symptoms may suggest internal hemorrhage caused by a ruptured ectopic pregnancy.

The mother of a 15-month-old reports that her baby has been experiencing diarrhea since the previous day. She mentions that everyone in the family has recently had the gastrointestinal virus that is circulating. The baby has shown reduced appetite, a mild fever, and several episodes of watery stools. The child is calmly sitting on the mother’s lap. The triage nurse observes indications of dehydration. There is no past medical history, no known drug allergies, and the baby is not on any medications. Vital signs are: temperature 100.4°F, heart rate 142, respiratory rate 48, and blood pressure 76/50.

This patient qualifies for at least ESI level 3. He will need laboratory tests and intravenous fluids as resources. Given his vital signs, the triage nurse may upgrade him to ESI level 2. For an infant of this age, both heart rate and respiratory rate fall outside the normal range.

A 57-year-old woman states, “I need to see a doctor about my cough. I can’t seem to get rid of it. I barely slept last night because I was coughing so much, and now I’m extremely tired.” She mentions having a fever of 101° last night and is producing yellow sputum when she coughs. Her medical history includes a hysterectomy three years ago; she is not on any medications but is allergic to Penicillin. Her vital signs are: temperature 101.4°, respiratory rate 28, heart rate 100, and oxygen saturation 90 percent.

Initially, during her triage evaluation, this patient appears to possibly have pneumonia. She is likely to require at least two resources, but her decreased oxygen saturation and elevated respiratory rate are worrisome. Based on her vital signs, the triage nurse should upgrade her to an ESI level 2.

A 34-year-old obese woman arrives at triage with complaints of diffuse abdominal pain rated 6 out of 10, ongoing for the past two days. She reports multiple episodes of vomiting and notes that her last bowel movement was three days ago. Her medical history includes back surgery; she is not on any medications and has a peanut allergy. Her vital signs are: temperature 97.8°F, heart rate 104, respiratory rate 16, blood pressure 132/80, and oxygen saturation 99%.

This patient will require at least two resources, such as laboratory tests, intravenous fluids, possibly IV medication for nausea, and a CT scan. The triage nurse should assess the patient’s vital signs, paying attention to the heart rate. Although the heart rate is slightly outside the normal range for the patient’s age, this may be attributed to pain or physical activity. Therefore, the appropriate action is to categorize the patient as ESI level 3.

A crying 9-year-old arrives at triage with her mother after slipping on an icy sidewalk and hurting her right forearm. The forearm appears clearly deformed, but circulation, sensation, and movement are intact. According to her mother, the child has no allergies, is not on any medications, and is otherwise healthy. Her vital signs are: blood pressure 100/68, heart rate 124, respiratory rate 32, and oxygen saturation 99 percent.

The child is in pain from her fall and is clearly distressed. She will need at least two resources: an x-ray and an orthopedic consultation, and possibly conscious sedation. Although her heart rate and breathing are increased, the triage nurse can confidently assign her to ESI level 3. The changes in her vital signs are most likely caused by pain and emotional upset.

A 72-year-old woman arrives at the emergency department using nasal cannula oxygen for her advanced COPD. She tells the triage nurse that she has an infected cat bite on her left hand, which appears red, swollen, and tender. She has no other health issues, uses albuterol as needed, and takes a daily aspirin. She has no known drug allergies. Her vital signs are: temperature 99.6°F, heart rate 88, respiratory rate 22, blood pressure 138/80, and oxygen saturation 91%. She reports no difficulty breathing.

This patient needs at least two resources: laboratory tests and intravenous antibiotics. She qualifies for ESI level 3. Although the triage nurse observes that her oxygen saturation and respiratory rate fall outside the normal adult range, the patient has advanced COPD. Therefore, these vital signs are not worrisome, and she will remain at ESI level 3 without being up-triaged.

##### Conclusion

This chapter lays the groundwork for comprehending how vital signs are used within the Emergency Severity Index triage system. It also discusses the unique considerations for patients younger than 36 months. More research is needed to determine the most appropriate vital sign thresholds for emergency department triage. Additional studies will focus on pediatric patients arriving at the emergency department. We anticipate that future updates to the ESI will incorporate new evidence about how well triage vital signs predict outcomes for both pediatric and adult patients.

### Appendix A. Frequently Asked Questions

##### Chapter 3.

###### Frequently Asked Questions

1. Is it necessary to raise the triage level for an adult patient if their heart rate exceeds 100?

No, it is something to take into account.

2. Is it necessary to increase a patient’s triage level if their pain score is 7 out of 10 or higher?

No, this is just one aspect to take into account.

If a patient is chronically confused, does that mean they should always be assigned to ESI level 2?

No, patients experiencing a sudden change in consciousness are classified as ESI level 2.

4. At what times should vital signs be measured?

For any patient classified as ESI level-3, vital signs are always taken if the triage nurse believes they could be helpful.

##### Chapter 4.

###### Frequently Asked Questions

Am I required to assign an ESI triage level of 2 to a 25-year-old woman who reports her pain as 10 out of 10 but is eating potato chips?

No. Since her vital signs are stable and she doesn’t meet any high-risk criteria, this patient should be categorized as ESI level 3. She will probably require lab tests and at least two resources, such as x-rays, an IV, or pain medication. Therefore, you should not allocate your last available bed to her.

Should an 80-year-old woman with ongoing confusion be assigned an ESI level 2 during triage?

No. The sudden appearance of confusion, lethargy, or disorientation qualifies for ESI level 2.

3. Shouldn’t a patient experiencing ongoing chest pain be classified as ESI level 1? After all, they ought to receive the highest priority.

Not every patient presenting with chest pain qualifies for ESI level-1. Patients who are unresponsive, without a pulse, not breathing, or in need of immediate life-saving measures fall under level-1. Those with chest pain who appear pale, sweaty, have low blood pressure, or a slow heart rate and need urgent IV access to stabilize their condition are also considered level-1. Patients who are stable but experiencing ongoing chest pain generally meet high-risk criteria and should be assigned ESI level 2, with prompt placement arranged.

##### Chapter 5.

###### Frequently Asked Questions

1. Why isn’t teaching someone how to use crutches considered a resource?

Although teaching patients how to use crutches can take up a significant amount of the emergency department staff’s time, this instruction is frequently given to individuals with uncomplicated ankle sprains. These cases are generally categorized as ESI level 4 (ankle x-ray = one resource). Such patients are clearly less acute and require fewer resources compared to more complicated cases, such as those with tibia or fibula fractures, who are typically classified as ESI level 3 (leg x-rays, orthopedic consultation, casting or splinting, IV pain management = two or more resources). Using a nursing resource intensity measure would more accurately represent the effort ED staff put into providing crutch-walking instruction.

2. Why doesn’t a splint qualify as a resource?

Using basic, pre-made splints (like those for ankle sprains) does not count as a resource. However, when ED staff create and apply splints—such as thumb spica splints for thumb fractures—this is considered a resource. To distinguish between patients with extremity injuries: those suspected of having fractures should be assigned ESI level 3 (requiring two or more resources, such as x-rays, pain medication, and the creation and application of splints or casts), while those more likely to have simple sprains should be classified as ESI level 4.

3. Why is a saline or heparin lock not considered a resource?

In general, placing a heparin lock does not require much time from the emergency department staff. Nevertheless, most patients who receive heparin locks also need at least two additional resources, such as lab tests or IV medications, which typically results in them being categorized as ESI level 3 regardless.

Are all patients undergoing conscious sedation classified as ESI level 3 or above?

Conscious sedation is regarded as a complex procedure (requiring two resources) and is typically carried out on patients who are also undergoing laboratory tests, x-rays, or additional procedures like fracture reduction or dilation and curettage.

5. Are eye irrigation, administration of nebulized medications, and blood transfusions classified as resources?

All three are regarded as resources in the context of ESI triage ratings. These resources are typically utilized for more acute patients, demand considerable time from ED staff, and are likely to result in longer patient stays.

6. Do all patients with asthma fall under ESI level 4 since they will need nebulized treatment?

No. Asthma patients who are stable and only need nebulized medication are classified as ESI level 4. Some, however, experience severe respiratory distress and qualify for ESI level 2. Others fall in between, needing intravenous steroids or an x-ray along with nebulized treatments, and are categorized as ESI level 3. Lastly, those who just need a prescription refill for their inhaler are placed in ESI level 5, as they do not need any resources.

##### Chapter 6.

###### Frequently Asked Questions

Why is it unnecessary to obtain vital signs when triaging patients classified as ESI level 1 or 2?

Vital signs are not required to classify patients as life-threatening (ESI level 1) or high-risk (ESI level 2). Because patients at ESI levels 1 and 2 are in critical condition, they need an immediate response from the medical team. Multiple actions can take place at the same time, and vital signs may be obtained during the initial evaluation in the main acute section of the emergency department.

2. Why are vital signs not mandatory for patients classified as ESI level-4 and 5?

Vital signs are not required to classify patients as low or no resource (ESI level 4 or 5). Additionally, the pain, anxiety, and discomfort experienced during an emergency department visit can often affect a patient’s vital signs, which may normalize soon after the initial evaluation. However, if there are indications of abnormal symptoms—such as changes in skin color, mental status, dizziness, or sweating—a nurse may decide to check vital signs. If there are no physical signs suggesting the need for vital sign assessment, the patient can be directed to the main emergency department or an express care room.

3. What is the reason for taking vital signs on patients classified as ESI level-3?

Vital signs help distinguish between patients who require multiple resources and are stable (ESI level 3) and those who may be unstable or at higher risk (ESI level 2). Sometimes, patients classified as ESI level 3 may actually have unstable vital signs despite appearing stable. For ESI level-3 patients, checking vital signs acts as an important safeguard. Typically, ESI level-3 patients have more complex conditions and many end up being admitted to the hospital. Because they are not suitable for the fast-track area, these patients may need to wait longer for definitive care. They pose a particular challenge during triage, making it essential for caregivers to use vital signs to ensure the correct ESI level is assigned.

4. Why are temperatures always taken for pediatric patients under 36 months of age?

Temperature helps distinguish pediatric patients who require few or no resources (ESI level 4 or 5) from those likely to need multiple resources. In infants under three months old, an abnormal temperature can suggest bacteremia and categorize the child as high-risk.

5. Why does the literature offer differing perspectives on the importance of vital signs in the triage process?

There is no conclusive evidence regarding the usefulness of vital signs in emergency department triage. Numerous elements can impact the reliability of vital sign measurements, which are somewhat dependent on the person performing the assessment. In certain situations, factors like long-term medication use (such as beta-blockers) can influence vital signs. Additionally, vital signs can serve to meet some public health responsibilities that emergency departments have. Finally, they are also useful for categorizing young pediatric patients into different groups.

6. Does JCAHO mandate that vital signs be taken during triage?

The Joint Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations does not explicitly set a standard for vital signs. However, it does state that physiologic parameters should be evaluated based on the patient's condition.

7. Should the vital sign thresholds in the danger zone box be strictly enforced?

In everyday practice, surpassing the danger zone vital sign thresholds leads to up-triage being “considered” instead of being done automatically. The skilled triage nurse must rely on sound clinical judgment to assign the patient’s ESI level. This decision involves evaluating the patient’s vital signs, medical history, medications, and overall clinical presentation. Further research is necessary to establish how well vital signs at triage predict outcomes and to define exact thresholds for up-triage.

8. What should be done if patients classified as ESI level-4 or 5 present with danger zone vital signs?

Although taking vital signs is not necessary to assign ESI levels 4 or 5, many patients may still have their vitals checked during triage if that is standard procedure in a particular emergency department. According to the ESI triage guidelines, the triage nurse does not need to consider vital signs when determining if a patient qualifies for ESI level 5 (no resources) or ESI level 4 (one resource). Nonetheless, in real-world settings, a careful nurse will apply sound clinical judgment and may factor in vital sign data when assigning the ESI level. For example, if a patient only wants a prescription refill, has no acute symptoms, and presents with a heart rate of 104 after walking to the ED, the nurse may still assign an ESI level 5. Conversely, if the same patient has a heart rate of 148 and it is irregular, the nurse should assign an ESI level 2. The triage nurse must also address situations such as elevated blood pressure in a patient otherwise classified as ESI level 4 or 5. If the patient has no symptoms related to the high blood pressure, the triage level should remain unchanged. Typically, elevated blood pressure in an asymptomatic patient will not be managed in the ED, but it is important to refer the patient to a primary care provider for further evaluation and long-term management.

# Emergency Severity Index, Version 4: Implementation Handbook

### Note from the Director

The Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality is proud to present the Emergency Severity Index, Version 4: Implementation Handbook. This guide details every aspect of the Emergency Severity Index (ESI), a five-level triage system used in emergency departments to categorize patients into five groups—ranging from 1 (most urgent) to 5 (least urgent)—based on the severity of their condition and the resources they require.

Following the creation of the ESI by emergency physicians Richard Wuerz and David Eitel in 1998 and successful pilot testing, the ESI Triage Group was established. Additional development of the ESI was supported by a grant from AHRQ. This group, made up of clinicians, managers, educators, and researchers, continued to improve the algorithm into its current form.

Aligned with our mission to enhance the quality, safety, efficiency, and effectiveness of health care for all Americans, AHRQ places a strong focus on training. This handbook, together with the included two DVDs, offers essential support to emergency department nurses, physicians, and administrators in establishing a thorough ESI educational program. The resources are grounded in ESI Version 4, which features updates to the algorithm, notably expanding the criteria for ESI level 1 and refining the guidelines for pediatric fever.

An effectively executed ESI program enables hospital emergency departments to quickly recognize patients requiring urgent care, more accurately identify those who can be safely and efficiently treated in a fast-track or urgent care setting instead of the main ED, and more precisely establish criteria for diverting ambulance patients away from the ED.

We hope this tool proves helpful as you continue working to enhance the quality of care in your emergency department.

### Chapter 2.Triage Acuity Systems

##### Standardization of Triage Acuity

Despite the fact that U.S. emergency departments (EDs) receive over 110 million visits annually (McCaig & Burt, 2004), there is a lack of comprehensive data on these visits at the local, regional, or national scale. This scarcity of information makes it challenging to address key questions such as “Which EDs treat the most critically ill patients?” and “What impact does patient acuity have on ED overcrowding?” As a result, there is increasing interest in developing standardized ED data systems in the United States to enhance clinical care, facilitate ED monitoring, enable benchmarking, and support research efforts (Barthell, Coonan, Finnell, Pollock, & Cochrane, 2004; Gilboy, Travers & Wuerz, 1999; Handler et al., 2004; National Center for Injury Prevention and Control).

A key data point in the emergency department is triage acuity, described by the Data Elements for Emergency Department Systems Task Force as the categorization of a patient's severity, indicating how critical their condition is in terms of being life- or limb-threatening and whether urgent intervention is required to relieve symptoms (NCIPC, 1997, p. 94).

There is significant inconsistency among emergency department triage acuity systems, especially within the United States (Emergency Nurses Association [ENA], 1997). Different systems use varying terminology for triage categories, and there is no universal consensus on the definitions for each level. Table 2-1 provides examples of acuity rating systems. Due to the absence of standardized triage acuity data in the U.S., it is understandable that the emergency department has been referred to as a “black box” of crucial public health information that remains mostly inaccessible in its current state (Martinez, 1995).

The Emergency Severity Index (ESI) is an innovative tool for assessing triage acuity in emergency departments. Research has demonstrated its consistency across various EDs, including those in both urban and rural areas, as well as in academic and community hospitals (Eitel, Travers, Rosenau, Gilboy & Wuerz, 2003). If adopted broadly in U.S. emergency departments, the ESI could serve as a standard method for triage acuity assessment. This chapter outlines the traditional triage systems used in U.S. EDs and reviews the research related to those systems. It then provides a brief overview of recent triage approaches developed in Australia, Canada, and the United Kingdom. The chapter ends with an examination of studies on the new ESI triage system and explores its potential advantages.

##### Triage Systems in the United States

Although numerous hospitals in the United States continue to utilize three- or four-level triage systems, there is a movement toward adopting five-level systems. The National Center for Health Statistics intends to substitute four-level triage data with five-level data in upcoming national benchmarking surveys of U.S. emergency departments. This change is driven by increasing evidence that five-level triage acuity data are more reliable and valid compared to three-level systems (personal communication, Linda McCaig, National Center for Health Statistics, October 6, 2004).

Both the ENA and the American College of Emergency Physicians (ACEP) have expressed their support for five-level triage systems in U.S. emergency departments. In 2003, a joint task force from ENA and ACEP was formed to review the evidence regarding five-level triage systems, and their work is still in progress. That same year, ACEP and ENA released a joint statement.

ACEP and ENA believe that patient care quality would improve by introducing a standardized triage scale and acuity classification system in emergency departments. Drawing on expert consensus and current evidence, ACEP and ENA endorse the use of a dependable, validated five-level triage scale (ACEP, 2003; ENA, 2003).

A 2005 task force paper recommended both the ESI and the Canadian Triage and Acuity Scale (CTAS) as reliable and valid triage methods (Fernandes et al., 2005). With increasing evidence favoring five-level triage systems, it is probable that a greater number of U.S. hospitals have adopted some version of this approach. The ENA intends to gather information on the types of triage systems used in U.S. hospitals in their forthcoming ED survey.

##### Research on Triage Systems in the United States

Research on triage acuity systems is increasing, with studies primarily examining two important aspects of triage nurses’ acuity ratings: reliability and validity (Pedhazur & Schmelkin, 1991; Waltz, Strickland & Lenz, 1991). Reliability refers to the consistency or level of agreement among users of a rating system. In the context of emergency department (ED) triage, two forms of reliability are relevant. Interrater reliability assesses whether two different nurses assign the same triage acuity level to the same patient, while intrarater reliability evaluates if the same nurse gives consistent acuity ratings to the same patient over time. Multiple studies in the United States have found that traditional three-level triage systems often have low interrater and intrarater reliability (Gill, Reese & Diamond, 1996; Travers, Waller, Bowling, Flowers & Tintinalli, 2002; Wuerz, Fernandes & Alarcon, 1998). For example, in one study, 305 triage assessments were analyzed after all triage nurses completed a required refresher course on the hospital’s three-level triage system (Travers et al., 2002). The initial ratings by the triage nurses were compared to retrospective ratings made by an expert panel of ED triage nurses, and the two groups agreed in only about half of the cases.

Validity refers to how accurately a rating system measures what it is supposed to measure. In the context of acuity ratings, validity indicates whether a label such as “nonurgent” truly reflects the absence of urgency in an emergency department patient’s condition. Assessing the validity of triage acuity has been challenging, and research studies have not reported on it.

In contrast to urine culture—which serves as the gold standard for accurately diagnosing urinary tract infections—there is no definitive gold standard for assessing the accuracy of triage acuity ratings in the conventional three-level triage system used in the United States. Nevertheless, surrogate indicators such as admission rates, resource use, and six-month mortality have been employed to evaluate five-level triage systems.

##### Triage Acuity Research on Five- Level Systems Abroad

Highly reliable and well-established five-level triage systems are now the standard in several other countries. Table 2-2 outlines three of these systems.

The Australasian Triage Scale (ATS), created in Australia, has been implemented across Australia and New Zealand since the early 1990s (Australasian College for Emergency Medicine, 1994, 2002; Cameron, Bradt & Ashby, 1996). The Australian Council on Healthcare Standards uses the ATS as the foundation for emergency department (ED) evaluation and quality assurance, with triage classifications regularly reviewed. Australian EDs are required to manage patients according to guidelines determined by their triage level. For instance, emergency cases must be attended to within 10 minutes, while non-urgent cases should be seen within 2 hours.

Several studies have assessed the validity and reliability of the ATS. Since there is no definitive gold standard for evaluating triage acuity, researchers have compared the five-level system to other illness severity scales and patient outcomes (Cameron et al., 1996; Cleary, Ashby, Jelinek & Lagaida, 1994; Erwich, Bond, Phillips, & Baggoley, 1997). Triage categories have shown strong correlations with disease- and population-specific measures, such as the Injury Severity Scales, trauma scores, and scales for cardiac, asthma, and pediatric patients. The ATS has also demonstrated a strong relationship with resource use and outcome indicators, including admission rates, emergency department length of stay, and mortality. Additionally, studies in which triage nurses assigned acuity levels to case scenarios have found that the ATS exhibits fair to moderate interrater reliability (Dilley & Standen, 1998; Jelinek & Little, 1996).

Five-level triage systems have been adopted in both the United Kingdom (U.K.) and Canada. In the U.K., the Manchester Triage Scale is utilized.

The system, developed in the U.K., uses a flow-chart presentation style (Manchester Triage Group, 1997). Nurses begin by determining the patient's main complaint, then select one of 52 flow charts to guide a structured interview and assign a triage category ranging from 1 (requiring immediate attention) to 5 (care needed within four hours). The Accident and Emergency Nurses Association has endorsed this system (Zimmermann, 2001). However, research on the Manchester system is limited. In one reliability study, triage decisions made by nurses were retrospectively compared to those of senior medical staff, with only fair to moderate agreement found (Goodacre, Gillett, Harris & Houlihan, 1999).

The Canadian Triage and Acuity Scale (CTAS) was created by a team of Canadian emergency physicians (Beveridge & Ducharme, 1997; Canadian Association for Emergency Physicians [CAEP], 2002). Both the National Emergency Nurses' Affiliation, Inc. (NENA) and the Canadian Association for Emergency Physicians (CAEP) have recognized CTAS as the national benchmark for emergency department triage. Canadian hospitals are mandated to report data, including CTAS scores, for all emergency department visits to the Canadian government. Research has also demonstrated that the Canadian five-level scale provides strong interrater reliability when clinicians assess the severity of written scenarios based on real patient cases.

##### History of the Emergency Severity Index (ESI)

The Emergency Severity Index (ESI) is a five-level triage system created by emergency department physicians Richard Wuerz and David Eitel in the United States (Gilboy et al., 1999; Wuerz, Milne, Eitel, Travers & Gilboy, 2000). The founders believed that a key function of an emergency department triage tool is to help prioritize patients according to the urgency of their conditions. Triage nurses assess priority by asking, “Who should be seen first?” However, Drs. Wuerz and Eitel recognized that when multiple high-priority patients arrive at the same time, the question shifts to, “How long can each patient safely wait?” The ESI was designed based on a new approach to ED triage. Beyond determining which patient needs immediate attention, triage nurses using the ESI also evaluate what resources are required to move the patient through the emergency department process. The ESI maintains the traditional focus on patient urgency, but also aims to achieve a second objective: not only sorting patients, but also directing them to the appropriate resources, ensuring the right patient receives the right care at the right time and place.

The initial version (v. 1) of the ESI was first used at two university-affiliated emergency departments in the spring of 1999. By fall 2000, the ESI was updated with input from emergency department clinicians to add triage criteria for pediatric patients, and this second version (v. 2) was then introduced in five more hospitals, including both non-university teaching and community hospitals. Feedback from nurses and physicians at these locations, combined with the best available scientific evidence, led to further improvements, resulting in version 3 (v. 3) in 2001 (Wuerz et al., 2001). More recent developments have produced additional updates to the tool, which is presented in this edition of the ESI handbook as version 4 (v. 4) (Tanabe et al., in press).

Emergency physicians and nurses in the United States and Canada have carried out multiple research studies evaluating the reliability and validity of the ESI. The ESI has been directly compared with traditional three-level triage systems as well as the five-level CTAS. These studies will be discussed later in the chapter. Similar to the Australasian, Canadian, and U.K. systems, the ESI triage system consists of five levels. However, it differs in both its conceptual framework and practical use. The triage systems from Australia, Canada, and the U.K. are based on the idea that triage is meant to determine how long a patient can safely wait for care in the emergency department, with specific definitions for the time to physician assessment included in their protocols. This is a key distinction between ESI and both CTAS and ATS, as ESI does not specify expected time frames for physician evaluation.

The ESI stands out because it requires the triage nurse to predict the resources a patient will need—such as diagnostic tests and procedures—in addition to assessing acuity, in order to assign a triage category for patients who are less critically ill. The ESI triage levels are shown in Figure 2-1. Later chapters will explain in detail how to use the ESI to categorize emergency department patients. In summary, the process begins with evaluating acuity by considering the stability of the patient’s vital signs and the risk of an immediate threat to life or organs. For patients who are stable, the nurse then estimates the resources likely needed to reach a disposition in the emergency department, based on their experience. These resource requirements can vary from none to two or more.

##### Research on the Emergency Severity Index

In a preliminary study evaluating ESI v.1 ratings for 493 triage cases at two Boston hospitals in 1998, researchers determined that the system was both valid and reliable (Wuerz et al., 2000). During the study, patients were triaged at the same time by the triage nurse using the standard three-level scale and by a research nurse applying the first version of the ESI. Afterwards, an investigator, who was unaware of the research nurse’s ESI rating, assigned an ESI level based solely on the written triage note. The triage levels showed a strong correlation with the resources utilized in the emergency department and with outcomes like hospital admission. Patients with higher acuity (ESI levels 1 and 2) required more resources and had a greater likelihood of being admitted compared to those with lower acuity (ESI levels 4 and 5). The agreement between the research nurse and the investigator was high, with 77 percent matching exactly and 22 percent differing by only one triage level.

Several studies have assessed the reliability of the ESI by using the kappa statistic to determine inter-rater agreement, where kappa values range from 0 (no agreement) to 1 (perfect agreement). At one of the original ESI sites, a time series design was employed to compare triage reliability using a three-level scale before and after the introduction of ESI v.1 (Travers et al., 2002). The reliability improved, with the weighted kappa increasing from 0.53 for the three-level system to 0.68 for the five-level ESI. Another study investigated the reliability and validity of ESI v.2 during and after its implementation in triage at seven hospitals in the northeast and southeast. Over 200 triage nurses participated in an ESI triage education program, where they rated 40 case studies using the ESI (Eitel et al., 2003). The findings showed substantial inter-rater reliability, with kappa values between 0.70 and 0.80. Additionally, 386 actual patient triage decisions were analyzed, revealing high inter-rater reliability with weighted kappas from 0.69 to 0.87. In a separate study conducted at an urban emergency department in the Midwest, researchers assessed the reliability of ESI v.3 for 403 real patient triages and found a kappa of 0.89 (Tanabe, Gimbel, Yarnold, Kyriacou & Adams, 2004).

Researchers from Canada and the United States have conducted a randomized trial to directly compare the inter-rater reliability of the ESI and CTAS (Worster et al., 2004). In this study, ten Canadian triage nurses with experience using CTAS were randomly assigned to receive either ESI version 3 or CTAS refresher training. Afterwards, they each evaluated 200 case studies using the assigned triage system. Both groups demonstrated excellent inter-rater reliability, with kappa values of 0.89 for ESI and 0.91 for CTAS.

The effectiveness of the ESI has been assessed by analyzing outcomes in several thousand patients. Research has demonstrated consistent and strong associations between the ESI and factors such as hospitalization rates, emergency department length of stay, and mortality (Eitel et al., 2003; Tanabe et al., 2004; Wuerz, 2001; Wuerz et al., 2001). Additionally, the ESI has shown moderate correlations with physician evaluation and management codes, as well as nursing workload indicators (Travers et al., 2002). The ESI also enables meaningful comparisons of patient case mix across different hospitals. In one study, a stratified random sample of 200 patients was taken from each of the seven original ESI hospitals to compare case mix (Eitel et al., 2003). The results showed that tertiary care centers had a greater proportion of high-acuity patients, while community hospitals had more patients requiring fewer resources, as anticipated.

A survey conducted among nursing staff at the two initial university teaching hospitals found that the introduction of the ESI was met with favorable feedback (Wuerz et al., 2001). Nurses indicated that the ESI was simpler to apply and more effective for prioritizing patients for care compared to the previous three-level systems used at these hospitals.

In the latest ESI study, the accuracy of ESI level 2 was closely analyzed (Tanabe et al., in press). Reviewing the outcomes of 571 ESI level-2 patients across five hospitals, researchers discovered that 20 percent required immediate, life-saving treatment. The study’s authors suggested that these patients should be categorized as ESI level 1. The revised ESI version 4, discussed in later chapters of this book, incorporates changes informed by this recent research.

##### Benefits of the Emergency Severity Index

The ESI has been adopted by hospitals across various regions, including both university and community hospitals, as well as teaching and nonteaching facilities. Clinicians, managers, and researchers in these emergency departments have recognized several advantages of ESI triage compared to traditional three-level systems. One key advantage is the ability to quickly identify patients who require immediate care. ESI triage emphasizes the efficient categorization of patients, especially when resources are limited. In some ways, ESI triage returns to the original intent of triage as established during Napoleon’s era. It involves rapidly sorting patients into five categories, each with significant differences in anticipated resource needs and corresponding operational requirements. Utilizing ESI for this swift categorization can enhance patient flow through the emergency department. After an ESI triage level is determined, patients can be directed to further assessment, registration, initial treatment, or the waiting area, depending on their severity and expected resource requirements. For instance, patients classified as level 1 or 2 can be taken straight to the treatment area for prompt evaluation and care, while those at levels 4 and 5 can proceed to registration and then wait for an available bed.

A key concern separate from ESI triage is when to perform a full nursing assessment. Many experts argue that a comprehensive assessment does not need to take place at the initial triage station, but can instead be completed in the main treatment area or a secondary triage area, depending on each patient’s needs and the current workload in the emergency department (Gilboy et al., 1999). At triage, only the evaluation necessary to assign an ESI level is required to help with the initial sorting of patients. Full clinical assessments are time-consuming, and conducting them at triage can delay care and lower satisfaction for patients with less severe conditions. As patient numbers and case complexity rise, leading to ED crowding, it is necessary to rethink traditional care processes to improve efficiency and effectiveness. Nevertheless, it remains essential to gather enough information to accurately determine the appropriate triage category. This is particularly important when patients face long waits to see a physician, which is common with higher patient volumes. Triage has become even more vital as waiting room times increase. Assigning a patient to an inappropriately low triage category can heighten the risk of poor outcomes due to prolonged waiting times.

Additional advantages of the ESI include its ability to identify patients who do not require care in the main emergency department and can instead be safely and more efficiently managed in a fast-track or urgent care setting. For instance, in many hospitals, triage guidelines specify that all ESI level 4 and 5 patients may be directed to either medical urgent care or minor trauma sections of the ED. The policy also permits certain level-3 patients, such as those needing straightforward migraine treatment, to be sent to urgent care. ESI level-3 patients assigned to urgent care, as well as any patients transferred from urgent care to the acute area for more serious issues, are tracked through the quality improvement program. Nurses using the ESI have noted that it improves communication about patient acuity compared to the previous three-level triage systems used at these facilities (Wuerz et al., 2001). For example, a triage nurse can simply say to the charge nurse, “I need a bed for a level 2 patient,” and the charge nurse immediately understands the urgency without needing a detailed patient description.

The ESI has also served as the basis for emergency department policies targeting certain groups. For instance, at one location, the psychiatric team is required to provide consultations for level 2 and 3 patients within 30 minutes, and for level 4 and 5 patients within an hour of being notified. At a different site, the ESI is part of a policy for patients over 20 weeks pregnant who come to the ED. Patients assigned ESI levels 1 and 2 receive care in the ED by emergency medicine staff with an obstetric consultation, while those at levels 3, 4, or 5 are directed to the hospital’s labor and delivery unit.

The ESI is also an effective method for setting thresholds to divert ambulance patients away from the ED. At Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston, the ED Diversion Policy and Guidelines specify that full capacity is reached when all RN-staffed ED beds are filled. The ESI helps assess when the department is over capacity.

Studies have demonstrated that the ESI is a dependable and accurate method for assessing triage acuity. This system has been implemented in numerous emergency departments across various regions of the United States, including both academic and community hospitals. These institutions have shown that using the ESI enhances emergency department operations and patient care. Broader use of the ESI in U.S. hospitals could help create a standardized approach to triage acuity assessment, supporting benchmarking, public health monitoring, and research efforts.

### Chapter 3. Introduction to the Emergency Severity Index

The Emergency Severity Index (ESI) is an easy-to-use, five-level triage tool that classifies emergency department patients by assessing both the severity of their condition and the resources they will require. The triage nurse first evaluates the patient’s acuity. If the patient does not qualify for the highest acuity levels (ESI level 1 or 2), the nurse then considers the anticipated resource needs to assign a triage level (ESI level 3, 4, or 5). Unlike other triage systems, the ESI uniquely incorporates resource requirements into its triage decisions. Acuity is judged based on the stability of vital signs and the risk to life, limb, or organ function. The nurse predicts resource needs by drawing on experience with patients who have had similar symptoms or injuries. Resource needs refer to the number of interventions or services a patient is likely to need before a decision about their care can be made. Once familiar with the ESI algorithm, the triage nurse can quickly and accurately assign patients to one of five clearly defined, non-overlapping categories. The ESI offers emergency departments a triage system that is both valid and reliable (Eitel, Travers, Rosenau, Gilboy & Wuerz, 2003; Travers, Waller, Bowling, Flowers & Tintinalli, 2002; Wuerz, Travers, Gilboy, Eitel, Rosenau & Yazhari, 2001; Tanabe, Gimbel, Yarnold, Kyriacou, & Adams, 2004; Tanabe, Gimbel, Yarnold, & Adams, 2004).

This chapter offers a detailed, step-by-step guide to triaging using the ESI algorithm. Later chapters delve deeper into essential concepts and include many examples to illustrate the nuances of applying ESI.

Algorithms are commonly utilized in emergency care settings. Many emergency clinicians are acquainted with the algorithms taught in programs like Basic Life Support, Advanced Cardiac Life Support, and the Trauma Nursing Core Course. These programs offer a systematic, stepwise method for clinical decision making that clinicians can master through repeated practice. At each stage, the algorithm guides the user on which questions to pose or what information to collect. Depending on the responses or data gathered, a decision is reached, and the algorithm leads the user to the subsequent step, eventually resulting in an outcome.

Using the ESI algorithm for triage requires an experienced emergency department nurse to begin at the top of the algorithm. Figure 3-1 provides a conceptual summary of the ESI algorithm, highlighting its key decision points. A more detailed explanation of the actual ESI algorithm is given later in the chapter (see Figure 3-1a). The algorithm involves four decision points (A, B, C, and D) to categorize patients into one of five triage levels (refer to Figure 3-1). With experience, the triage nurse will be able to quickly progress through each ESI decision point.

##### Decision Point A: Is the Patient Dying?

In simple terms, at decision point A (Figure 3-2), the triage nurse determines whether the patient is dying. If the response is “yes,” the triage process ends there, and the patient is immediately assigned to ESI level 1. If the answer is “no,” the process continues to the next step in the algorithm, decision point B.

This question helps assess if the patient is at risk of dying (conceptual algorithm): Does the patient need urgent life-saving treatment? The questions below assist in evaluating whether the patient fulfills level-1 criteria:

Does the patient need urgent airway management, medication, or another hemodynamic intervention?

Does the patient exhibit any of the following: current intubation, absence of breathing, lack of pulse, significant respiratory distress, oxygen saturation below 90 percent, sudden changes in mental status, or unresponsiveness?

Studies have shown that triage nurses can reliably anticipate when immediate interventions are necessary (Tanabe et al., in press). For ESI triage, Table 3-1 outlines which interventions are classified as life-saving and which are not.

Interventions that are not classified as life-saving may include certain diagnostic or therapeutic procedures, but do not involve actions that would directly “save a life.” Life-saving interventions focus on ensuring an open airway, sustaining breathing, or supporting circulation. The following questions may assist in assessing whether the patient needs a life-saving intervention.

Is this patient's airway open and unobstructed?

Is the patient showing signs of breathing?

Is the patient showing a pulse?

Is the nurse worried about the pulse’s rate, rhythm, and quality?

Was this patient intubated before arriving at the hospital due to worries about their capacity to keep their airway open, breathe on their own, or sustain adequate oxygen levels?

Is the nurse worried about whether this patient can supply enough oxygen to their tissues?

An ESI level-1 patient arrives at the emergency department in a critical and unstable state. Immediate intervention is essential to prevent death, prompting a coordinated team response with the physician present at the bedside and nurses delivering intensive care. These patients receive immediate attention, as prompt treatment can significantly impact their risk of complications or death.

A primary distinction between ESI level-1 and level-2 patients is the necessity for immediate physician involvement in patient care. Level-1 patients are in critical condition and need prompt evaluation and intervention by a physician. In contrast, although level-2 patients are also seriously ill, emergency nurses can begin treatment using established protocols without a physician present. The nurse understands that interventions are required but is assured that the patient’s condition is stable enough not to worsen rapidly. The nurse can start intravenous lines, provide supplemental oxygen, perform an ECG, and connect the patient to a cardiac monitor before a physician is required at the bedside.

When assessing the necessity for urgent lifesaving measures, the triage nurse thoroughly examines the patient’s respiratory condition and oxygen saturation (SpO2) levels. Even if a patient is still breathing, severe respiratory distress or an SpO2 below 90 percent signals the need for prompt action to secure the airway and ensure adequate oxygenation. Such a patient will need the physician present to administer medications for rapid sequence intubation or to initiate other airway and breathing interventions.

Patients presenting with chest pain should be assessed according to the same standards. While some individuals with chest pain are quite stable and may only need a diagnostic ECG, they do not fulfill level-1 criteria. In contrast, those who appear pale, sweaty, in acute respiratory distress, or are hemodynamically unstable will need urgent, life-saving treatment and do qualify for level-1 criteria. Every patient with chest pain must be evaluated against the level-1 criteria to decide if immediate life-saving intervention is necessary.

When deciding if a patient needs immediate life-saving care, the triage nurse must evaluate the patient’s level of consciousness. The ESI algorithm utilizes the AVPU scale (alert, verbal, pain, unresponsive) as shown in Table 3-2. This step aims to detect patients experiencing a sudden change in consciousness. The triage nurse should look for deviations from the patient’s baseline, with particular concern for those who were previously alert but are now classified as P (pain) or U (unresponsive). Unresponsiveness should be considered in the context of sudden neurological changes, and not in patients with pre-existing developmental delays, documented dementia, or aphasia. Any patient who is unresponsive—including those who are intoxicated and do not respond to painful stimuli—meets level-1 criteria and requires immediate assessment. For instance, a patient with an acute decline in mental status who cannot maintain their airway or is experiencing severe respiratory distress would need urgent intervention.

Users familiar with ESI version 3 (v. 3) will observe a significant modification in the ESI level-1 criteria. The primary distinction between ESI v. 3 and ESI version 4 (v. 4) is the recognition and reclassification of some of the most critically ill patients, who were previously categorized as ESI level 2. Now, patients who need immediate life-saving interventions are assigned to ESI level 1. Under the earlier version, a patient experiencing severe respiratory distress who needed intubation but was still breathing would have been placed in ESI level 2. In the updated version, this patient now qualifies for level 1. Additional examples of patients now considered ESI level 1 include those who are weak and dizzy with a heart rate of 30 or 200. While this adjustment may not impact a large number of patients, it ensures that the most critically ill are classified correctly. Before v. 4, triage nurses often faced two types of ESI level-2 patients: those needing immediate attention and those who could safely wait a short period (about 10 minutes) without worsening. This issue prompted a large, multi-center, prospective study to determine which ESI level-2 patients actually received immediate interventions (Tanabe et al., in press). The findings from that study led to the revision of the ESI system. This new edition of the ESI handbook outlines these updates and explains ESI v. 4.

An ESI level-1 patient does not necessarily arrive at the emergency department by ambulance. Individuals with drug overdoses or acute alcohol intoxication might be left at the entrance, while children could be brought in by car and carried inside. An experienced triage nurse can quickly recognize these critically ill patients. With a swift, visual assessment from a distance, the nurse identifies those in severe distress. These patients are promptly moved to the treatment area, where resuscitation begins immediately.

Patients classified as ESI level 1 make up about 1 to 3 percent of all emergency department cases (Eitel et al., 2003; Wuerz, Milne, Eitel, Travers & Gilboy, 2000; Wuerz et al., 2001). These patients require immediate resuscitation by either the emergency physician and nurse or the trauma or code team upon arrival. Research on ESI indicates that the majority of ESI level-1 patients are admitted to intensive care units, while some die in the emergency department (Eitel et al., 2003; Wuerz, 2001). A small number of ESI level-1 patients are discharged from the ED if their altered level of consciousness or vital functions are reversible, such as in cases of hypoglycemia, seizures, alcohol intoxication, or anaphylaxis.

Illustrations of ESI level 1:

Heart stoppage.

Cessation of breathing.

Acute difficulty breathing.

Oxygen saturation below 90%.

Severely injured trauma patient arriving in an unresponsive state.

Overdose presenting with a respiratory rate of 6.

Three general questions are utilized to assess if the patient satisfies level-2 criteria.

Is this considered a high-risk scenario?

2. Does the patient exhibit confusion, lethargy, or disorientation?

3. Is the patient experiencing significant pain or discomfort?

The triage nurse gathers relevant subjective and objective data to promptly address these questions. An overview of ESI level-2 criteria is provided here, with a more comprehensive discussion of patients qualifying for ESI level-2 to be covered in Chapter 4.

Severe difficulty breathing accompanied by agonal or gasping breaths.

Markedly slow or fast heart rate accompanied by evidence of inadequate tissue perfusion.

Low blood pressure accompanied by indications of inadequate tissue perfusion.

A trauma patient in need of urgent resuscitation with crystalloids and colloids.

Experiencing chest pain, appearing pale and sweaty, with a blood pressure of 70 by palpation.

Feeling weak and lightheaded, heart rate is 30.

Severe allergic response.

Infant exhibiting limpness.

Unconscious with a strong smell of alcohol.

Low blood sugar accompanied by altered mental state.

##### Decision Point B: Should the Patient Wait?

After the triage nurse establishes that the patient does not qualify for ESI level 1, they proceed to decision point B (refer to Figure 33). At this stage, the nurse must determine if the patient can safely wait to be evaluated. If waiting is not appropriate, the patient is assigned ESI level 2. If the patient is able to wait, the process continues to the following step in the algorithm.

###### Is This a High-risk Situation?

Drawing on a brief patient interview, general observations, and the intuition developed through experience, the triage nurse identifies patients at high risk. Often, factors such as the patient’s age and medical history play a role in this assessment. A high-risk patient is someone whose condition could quickly worsen or who shows symptoms indicating a need for urgent, time-sensitive care. This type of patient may face a significant threat to life or organ function. In most cases, a comprehensive physical exam or a complete set of vital signs is not necessary to recognize high risk. Instead, the patient may describe symptoms that an experienced triage nurse immediately recognizes as serious. For instance, a patient who says, “I never get headaches, but after lifting something heavy, I now have the worst headache of my life,” would be triaged as ESI level 2, as these symptoms could indicate a subarachnoid hemorrhage.

If a patient is classified as ESI level 2, the triage nurse has judged that it is not safe for the patient to wait in the waiting area for any period of time. Although ESI does not define exact time frames, ESI level-2 patients are a top priority and should typically be placed and begin receiving treatment within 10 minutes of their arrival. It is crucial to note that even though the criteria for level 1 have broadened in version 4 of the algorithm, ESI level-2 patients are still regarded as very ill and at significant risk. Immediate care is required, and a suitable bed must be located right away. In most cases, instead of proceeding to the next patient, the triage nurse recognizes the severity of the situation and promptly notifies the charge nurse or staff in the patient care area that there is an ESI level-2 patient.

Instances of high-risk scenarios:

Experiencing ongoing chest pain suggestive of coronary syndrome, but currently stable and not in need of urgent life-saving treatment.

A healthcare worker experiencing a needlestick injury.

Shows symptoms of a stroke, but does not fulfill level-1 requirements.

Ectopic pregnancy needs to be excluded; patient is hemodynamically stable.

A patient undergoing chemotherapy, and thus immunocompromised, presenting with a fever.

A patient exhibiting suicidal or homicidal tendencies.

Chapter 4 provides further details about high-risk situations.

###### Is the Patient Confused, Lethargic, or Disoriented?

This is the second question to consider at decision point B. Once more, the focus is on determining if the patient is experiencing a sudden change in consciousness. Patients who are normally confused do not qualify for level-2 criteria.

Confused: Shows unsuitable reactions to stimuli, with reduced attention span and impaired memory.

Lethargic: Sleepy, experiencing increased sleep, but reacts suitably when prompted.

Disoriented: The patient cannot accurately respond to questions regarding time, location, or identity.

Instances of patients who exhibit confusion, lethargy, or disorientation:

Recent development of confusion in an older patient.

The 3-month-old whose mother says the baby is constantly sleeping.

The teenager was discovered in a state of confusion and disorientation.

Each of these cases suggests that the brain could be impaired either structurally or chemically.

###### Is This Patient in Severe Pain or Distress?

At decision point B, the triage nurse’s third question is whether the patient is experiencing pain or distress. If the answer is “no,” the nurse proceeds to the next step in the process. If the answer is “yes,” the nurse must evaluate the severity of the pain or distress, using clinical observation and/or a self-reported pain score of 7 or above on a 0 to 10 scale. When a patient reports pain at 7/10 or higher, the nurse may assign an ESI level 2, but this is not mandatory. Pain is a frequent reason for emergency department visits, and not all patients with pain scores of 7/10 or more require an ESI level-2 classification. For instance, a patient with a sprained ankle and pain rated at 8/10 would typically be considered ESI level 4. Assigning a level 2 rating based solely on pain is not necessary in such cases.

In certain patients, pain can be evaluated through clinical observation, such as noting distressed facial expressions, sweating, body posture, and alterations in vital signs. The triage nurse looks for physical signs of acute pain that validate the patient’s reported pain level. For instance, a patient experiencing abdominal pain who is sweating, has a rapid heart rate, and elevated blood pressure, or a patient with intense flank pain, vomiting, pale skin, and a history of kidney stones, are both clear examples of individuals who qualify for ESI level-2. More details about ESI level 2 and pain assessment can be found in Chapter 4.

Severe distress may be either physical or mental. Instances of distress include a victim of sexual assault, an aggressive patient, or a person with bipolar disorder experiencing a manic episode.

ESI level-2 patients represent a relatively small but high-risk segment, making up 20 to 30 percent of emergency department cases (Travers et al., 2002; Wuerz et al., 2001; Tanabe, Gimbel et al., 2004). After identifying an ESI level-2 patient, the triage nurse must ensure prompt care. Registration can be handled by a family member or completed at the bedside. These patients require vital signs and a thorough nursing assessment, though this does not have to occur during triage. Their placement should not be postponed to complete vital sign collection. Studies on ESI indicate that 50 to 60 percent of ESI level-2 patients are admitted from the emergency department (Wuerz et al., 2001).

##### Decision Point C: Resource Needs

If the answers to the first two decision points are “no,” the triage nurse proceeds to decision point C (refer to Figure 3-4). At this stage, the nurse should ask, “How many different resources will this patient likely require for the physician to make a disposition decision?” The possible dispositions include discharging the patient home, admitting them to the observation unit or hospital, or transferring them to another facility. This step again relies on the triage nurse’s previous experience with similar emergency department cases. It is important for ED nurses to recognize that estimating resource needs is based on standards of care and is not influenced by the hospital’s type (teaching or non-teaching) or its location. Any patient presenting to an emergency department should generally require the same resources to reach a disposition. Taking into account the patient’s brief subjective and objective evaluation, medical history, allergies, medications, age, and gender, the nurse must determine how many different resources will be needed for the physician to decide on a disposition. Essentially, what is the usual protocol for a patient presenting with this common complaint? The triage nurse should make this judgment based on their assessment of the patient, focusing on the standard practices of the specific ED rather than individual provider preferences.

To determine what resources are needed, the triage nurse should understand the standards of care in the emergency department. The nurse must also be aware of the idea of “prudent and customary.” An effective way to approach this is to consider, “Based on this patient’s main complaint or injury, what resources will the emergency physician probably use?” Resources may include hospital services, diagnostic tests, procedures, consultations, or interventions that go beyond the physician’s history and physical exam, as well as basic emergency department actions like applying a bandage. Additional details and examples can be found in Chapter 5.

Table 3-3 outlines which items are classified as resources and which are not for ESI triage purposes. Patients at ESI level 3 are expected to need two or more resources, those at ESI level 4 are anticipated to need one resource, and ESI level 5 patients are expected to need none, as shown in Table 3-4.

Studies indicate that ESI level-3 patients account for 30% to 40% of those treated in the emergency department (Eitel et al., 2003; Wuerz et al., 2001). These individuals typically need more comprehensive assessments but are considered stable in the short term, which can result in longer ED stays. ESI level 4 and 5 patients represent 20% to 35% of emergency department visits, and this percentage may be higher in areas with limited access to primary care. With proper training and a suitable skill set, mid-level providers can manage these patients in fast-track or express care units, especially since many present with trauma-related issues. Given their stable condition, it is generally safe for these patients to wait several hours before being seen.

##### Decision Point D:The Patient's Vital Signs

Prior to assigning a patient to ESI level 3, the nurse must review the patient’s vital signs to determine if they fall outside the normal range for the patient’s age and if these abnormalities are clinically significant. If the vital signs are abnormal, the triage nurse should consider elevating the triage level to ESI level 2. Ultimately, it is up to the triage nurse to decide whether the patient should be upgraded to ESI level 2 due to abnormal vital signs. This is referred to as decision point D.

Vital sign parameters vary by age (refer to Figure 3-5). The vital signs considered include pulse, respiratory rate, and oxygen saturation, with body temperature also assessed in children under three years old. Based on these criteria, a triage nurse may decide to upgrade an adult patient with a heart rate of 104, or keep them at ESI level 3. Similarly, a 6-month-old infant with a cold and a respiratory rate of 48 might be assigned to ESI level 2 or 3. The nurse must determine, using the patient’s history and physical exam, whether the vital signs indicate a high enough risk that the patient should not wait to be evaluated. Chapter 6 provides a detailed discussion of vital signs and includes examples.

Temperature is considered only for children younger than three years old. A high fever may prevent young children from being placed in categories 4 and 5. This approach helps to identify children who may have bacteremia and ensures they are not directed to a fast track area or made to wait for an extended period. Detailed pediatric fever guidelines will be provided in Chapter 6.

###### Does Time to Treatment Influence ESI Triage Categories?

Estimating how long a patient can wait before being seen by a doctor is a key part of most triage systems. The Australasian and Canadian Triage Systems specify that patients must be evaluated by a physician within a set timeframe according to their triage level. In contrast, the ESI does not set strict time requirements for physician assessment. Nonetheless, patients classified as ESI level 2 should receive prompt attention, though the exact timing is determined by each institution’s policy. There is often confusion between institutional policies, the actual process of patient care, and the ESI triage level.

We will present four patient cases where there may appear to be a contradiction between patient flow and triage category. Trauma patients often arrive at triage after experiencing a significant injury mechanism, such as being an unrestrained passenger in a high-speed car accident. Sometimes, these patients do not arrive by ambulance but come to triage on their own, reporting localized right upper quadrant pain and having stable vital signs. Although this patient is physiologically stable, walked into the emergency department, and does not meet the criteria for ESI level 1, they are still at high risk for injuries like a liver laceration and other serious trauma, so they should be assigned ESI level 2. Many emergency departments have trauma protocols and trauma response levels that require prompt initiation of care. Both triage level and trauma response level are important and should be documented as separate scores. While the triage nurse correctly identifies this as a physiologically stable trauma patient and assigns ESI level 2, she should also ensure the patient is placed and managed according to trauma policy. The patient is likely stable for at least another 10 minutes and does not need immediate life-saving interventions. However, if the same patient arrived with a palpable blood pressure of 80, they would be classified as ESI level 1 and would need urgent, life-saving hemodynamic interventions.

Another instance of policies influencing triage levels involves patients presenting with stable chest pain. If a patient is physiologically stable but has chest pain that could indicate an acute coronary syndrome, they qualify for ESI level-2. These patients do not need immediate life-saving measures but are considered high-risk and require prompt attention. An ECG should be completed within 10 minutes of arrival, and many emergency departments have protocols to ensure rapid ECG initiation. Although care for these patients should begin quickly, the ECG itself is a diagnostic tool, not a life-saving intervention. If all patients with chest pain were assigned ESI level-1, it would make it challenging to prioritize those who truly need immediate life-saving care. However, a chest pain patient who arrives at triage sweating and with a palpable blood pressure of 80 would meet ESI level-1 criteria.

A third instance of time-critical care involves patients showing symptoms of an acute stroke. If these patients are physiologically stable, a delay of 10 minutes before starting treatment is unlikely to worsen their condition. On the other hand, a stroke patient who cannot maintain their airway qualifies for ESI level 1.

In another scenario, an elderly patient who has fallen and may have a hip fracture arrives with family by private car and is experiencing significant pain. Although the patient does not strictly qualify for ESI level 2, their discomfort is considerable. The triage nurse would assign an ESI level 3 and likely prioritize placing the patient in a bed ahead of other ESI level 3 patients. Similar situations can occur with patients arriving by ambulance. However, arriving by ambulance alone does not justify assigning ESI level 1 or 2. Triage levels should always be determined using ESI criteria, regardless of how the patient arrived.

Overall, care for ESI level-2 patients should be expedited, with the goal of placing them in the treatment area within 10 minutes. It is crucial to note that although ESI version 4 has broadened level-1 criteria to include patients needing immediate interventions who were previously classified as level 2, all level-2 patients remain potentially very ill and need prompt assessment and care. The triage nurse has determined that it is unsafe for these patients to wait. While they may appear stable at present, their condition could quickly worsen, and timely diagnostic or therapeutic interventions may be critical (for example, a stable patient with chest pain should receive an ECG within 10 minutes of arrival), or they may face a possible major threat to life or organ function. ESI level-2 patients are still regarded as being at very high risk.

Given the current issue of ED overcrowding, it is common for triage nurses to encounter multiple ESI level-2 patients when there are no available ED beds. In these circumstances, there may be a temptation to “undertriage,” which can result in significant harm to patients and inaccurately reflect the ED’s patient population. When several ESI level-2 patients present at the same time, the triage nurse should assess each one using the ESI algorithm. This allows the nurse to prioritize among the level-2 patients, identifying those at greatest risk and helping to guide patient placement accordingly.

##### Summary

In conclusion, the ESI is a straightforward five-level triage system that categorizes patients according to the severity of their condition and the resources they require. The ESI triage process relies on four main decision points. With this system, an experienced emergency department nurse can quickly and accurately assess and triage patients.

### Chapter 4. ESI Level 2

This chapter builds upon the initial overview of the ESI, emphasizing the importance of the experienced ED nurse’s clinical judgment. The ESI triage training program should allocate significant time to clarifying which patients qualify for ESI level 2. Here, we focus on typical patient scenarios that fulfill the criteria for ESI level 2.

Once the triage nurse has established that the patient does not need urgent life-saving care, the next step is to assess whether the patient can wait. In making this judgment, the triage nurse should ask, “Would I allocate my last available bed to this patient?” The three questions outlined in Figure 4-1 must be addressed, as they are essential elements of the ESI level-2 criteria.

Is this considered a high-risk scenario?

2. Is the patient showing signs of newly developed confusion, drowsiness, or disorientation?

3. Is the patient in significant pain or discomfort?

The rest of this chapter explores the decision-making aspects of ESI level 2 in depth. Numerous examples are included, illustrating potential medical diagnoses linked to patients’ chief complaints and symptoms. An experienced triage nurse will always evaluate the patient’s chief complaint, observed signs and symptoms, demographic information, and medical history to help identify high-risk situations. Although the goal of nurse triage is not to establish a medical diagnosis, these scenarios rely on the triage nurse’s expertise regarding possible diagnoses related to specific complaints. Comprehensive resources on the signs and symptoms of various medical conditions include the Emergency Nursing Core Curriculum[©] and other emergency nursing reference books. The following section highlights selected examples of high-risk situations, though it is not meant to be all-inclusive. These examples are summarized in Table 4-1.

##### High-risk Situations

Recognizing high-risk situations is essential in the triage decision-making process, no matter which triage system is applied. The ESI emphasizes the significance of identifying high-risk cases and relies on the triage nurse’s knowledge and experience to determine which patients are at elevated risk.

There is limited literature on how emergency department triage nurses make decisions. While knowledge and experience are essential, they are not enough on their own. Another crucial element is intuition or a “sixth sense.” Novice triage nurses should be taught practical guidelines, or rules of thumb, to rely on until they gain the confidence and experience needed to make quick, accurate judgments. Examples of such guidelines include “assume all women of childbearing age are pregnant until proven otherwise” or “consider all chest pain as cardiac in origin until proven otherwise.” New triage nurses are also instructed in recognizing symptom clusters, such as the cardiac cluster of chest pain, nausea, shortness of breath, and sweating. Through previous clinical experiences, ED nurses develop what are called clinical portraits, storing specific patient scenarios in their long-term memory. For instance, a nurse will always recall a patient with fever, stiff neck, and a meningococcal rash when encountering a similar case in the future. With each triage situation, nurses must draw upon all their accumulated knowledge and experience. Experienced triage nurses should be able to easily recognize high-risk situations.

Vital signs alone are often insufficient for identifying patients at high risk. Patients usually arrive at the emergency department with a main complaint, symptoms, or a history that points to a potentially serious issue that can quickly worsen if not addressed immediately. Factors such as the patient’s age, medical history, and current medications often affect how severe the main complaint appears. For instance, an elderly, frail patient with intense abdominal pain faces a much greater risk of complications and death compared to a healthy 20-year-old. The older patient with abdominal pain should be assigned an ESI level 2, while the younger adult with stable vital signs is generally categorized as ESI level 3. Triage nurses frequently recognize high-risk cases, which may then be supported by abnormal vital signs. For example, a patient reporting fever and a productive cough might have a respiratory rate of 32 and an oxygen saturation of 90 percent. An experienced triage nurse can use their knowledge to determine that this patient likely has pneumonia, is at risk for further oxygen desaturation, and is therefore high risk. In contrast, less experienced emergency department nurses may lack the necessary skills to reliably identify high-risk situations and make correct triage decisions. As a result, an inexperienced triage nurse can be a liability, regardless of the triage system in place. They have not yet developed the ability to use symptom patterns, clinical scenarios, or intuition—methods that are essential for recognizing high-risk patients. The following section will outline specific examples of high-risk situations.

###### Abdominal and Gastrointestinal

Abdominal pain is a common reason for visits to the emergency department. What factors make it high risk? Taking a thorough history and evaluating the current pain level, respiratory rate, and heart rate are key components that help identify high-risk cases. Pain severity is just one aspect to consider. If severe abdominal pain is accompanied by tachycardia or respiratory distress, this may indicate shock and puts the patient at higher risk. Elderly patients with severe abdominal pain are also at increased risk, as they are more likely to suffer from bowel obstructions, gastrointestinal bleeding, and other abdominal issues that carry greater morbidity and mortality compared to younger individuals. It is crucial to look for signs and symptoms of an acute abdomen in all patients presenting with abdominal pain. Important questions include: How long has the pain been present? What prompted the patient to seek emergency care today? Has the patient experienced severe nausea, vomiting, or diarrhea? Is there evidence of dehydration? Patients who report severe, “ripping” abdominal pain that radiates to the back should be evaluated for a possible abdominal aortic aneurysm. This pain is typically described as severe, constant, and of sudden onset, and these patients may have a history of hypertension.

Patients presenting with abdominal pain are frequently assigned an ESI level 3 at the start of the triage assessment, but if tachycardia or additional risk factors are identified, the triage nurse may conclude that the patient is actually at high risk.

Vomiting blood or presenting with blood per rectum requires careful assessment, taking vital signs into account. A 30-year-old with bright red rectal bleeding, stable vital signs, and no additional risk factors does not qualify for ESI level 2. However, an older adult who called emergency services due to vomiting blood and has a heart rate of 117 and a respiratory rate of 24 is considered high risk and does meet the criteria for ESI level 2.

###### Cardiovascular

Chest pain is a frequent reason for seeking medical care. The symptoms of acute coronary syndromes (ACS) can be vague, making it challenging to assess ACS risk during triage. Patients experiencing chest or upper abdominal discomfort, with or without other symptoms, generally require a prompt ECG to check for ACS and should be considered high risk—classified as ESI level 2. Triage nurses must be aware of how heart disease can present differently, especially in women. For instance, a 54-year-old obese woman arriving at the emergency department with upper abdominal pain and fatigue is at risk for ACS and should be assigned to ESI level 2 as high risk. Patients with chest pain who are unstable and need immediate interventions like intubation or hemodynamic support should be triaged as ESI level 1. Not all chest pain cases fall into level 1 or 2. For example, a healthy 20-year-old with chest pain, cough, and a fever of 101°F is at low risk for ACS and does not meet ESI level 1 or 2 criteria. Each case should be evaluated individually. Other high-risk cardiovascular conditions include possible hypertensive emergencies, acute arterial blockages, and patients with fever following valve replacement surgery.

###### Dental, Ear, Nose, and Throat

While less frequent, epiglottitis still occurs and poses a possible threat to the airway. Peritonsillar abscess is another condition that can potentially compromise the airway, and both are considered high-risk situations. If a patient with either condition is at immediate risk of airway obstruction and needs urgent intervention, they meet level-1 criteria. For patients presenting with epistaxis, the triage nurse should check blood pressure, even though this step is not included in the ESI algorithm. Causes of epistaxis may include a posterior nosebleed from a hypertensive crisis, nose picking in a patient taking Coumadin®, or recent cocaine use. Regardless of the cause, these patients should be assigned ESI level 2, as they are considered high-risk.

###### Environmental

Individuals with inhalation injuries are at elevated risk for airway obstruction. If a patient exhibits marked airway distress necessitating urgent intervention, they fulfill level-1 criteria.

###### Facial

Patients who have sustained facial trauma need to be assessed for potential facial fractures. If fractures are identified, they are frequently linked to other serious injuries and can result in airway obstruction, making it important to classify these cases as high risk. Facial injuries that have already caused airway compromise should be assigned an ESI level 1 to ensure prompt airway intervention, while those at significant risk for airway compromise should be categorized as ESI level 2.

###### General Medical

A number of other general medical issues should be evaluated for potential high-risk scenarios. These complications include diabetic ketoacidosis, abnormal blood sugar levels (either high or low), sepsis, episodes of fainting or near-fainting, and various electrolyte imbalances that may require urgent intervention. Hyperkalemia, in particular, poses a significant risk as it can cause dangerous heart rhythm disturbances. This condition should be considered in dialysis patients who present with weakness. Additionally, cancer patients receiving chemotherapy who develop a fever are at increased risk for sepsis and must be recognized as high-risk and assessed promptly.

###### Genitourinary

Men experiencing testicular torsion typically report intense pain, are readily identifiable, and need prompt assessment, surgical treatment, and immediate pain management. Another high-risk genitourinary emergency involves renal dialysis patients who cannot finish their dialysis sessions, as they may have multiple electrolyte imbalances. Both women and men, though more frequently men, may arrive at triage with sudden urinary retention. Men over 65 often present with benign prostatic hypertrophy leading to an inability to urinate. Postoperative urinary retention can also occur in both sexes. These individuals are in significant distress and require urgent urinary catheterization. Such cases represent patients in severe distress who should be assigned an ESI level 2.

###### Mental Health

Patients presenting with mental health issues are considered high risk if they pose a threat to themselves, others, or their surroundings. Individuals who are suicidal, homicidal, psychotic, violent, or at risk of fleeing should be classified as high risk. Intoxication alone, without evidence of trauma or risk of aspiration, does not qualify as high risk. However, intoxicated patients should be thoroughly evaluated for trauma or behavioral concerns linked to alcohol use or their medical history. If either is present, the situation may be high risk, and the patient should be assigned an ESI level 2.

###### Neurological

Patients experiencing severe headaches along with changes in mental status, elevated blood pressure, lethargy, fever, or a rash should be regarded as high risk. Additionally, any individual who suddenly develops speech difficulties or motor weakness should be categorized as ESI level 2. These symptoms may indicate an acute stroke, making prompt assessment essential. The time since symptom onset is a key consideration in selecting treatment options, especially for fibrinolytic or other interventions. If a patient with no prior history of headaches arrives at the emergency department with a sudden headache, they should be considered at high risk for a subarachnoid hemorrhage. Such patients often recall exactly what they were doing when the headache started, commonly after activities like lifting, having a bowel movement, or sexual activity.

###### Obstetrical and Gynecological

Women presenting with abdominal pain or vaginal bleeding should be thoroughly evaluated, and vital signs should be recorded unless there is an immediate life-threatening condition. For all women of reproductive age, it is essential to determine pregnancy status and the date of the last menstrual period. The triage nurse should look for symptoms of abruptio placentae and placenta previa in women who are in late pregnancy. In early pregnancy, assessment should focus on identifying signs of ectopic pregnancy and spontaneous abortion. Pregnant patients between 14 and 20 weeks gestation or more should be promptly evaluated by a physician, following the specific guidelines of the institution. Postpartum women who report heavy vaginal bleeding should also receive urgent medical attention from a physician. Any woman, whether pregnant or postpartum, who exhibits significant hemodynamic instability and requires immediate life-saving measures should be assigned an ESI level 1 during triage.

###### Ocular

Patients who experience eye trauma, sudden partial or complete vision loss, or chemical exposure to the eye are at significant risk for lasting eye damage and should be assigned to ESI level 2 during triage. Visual loss can be caused by conditions such as central retinal artery occlusion, acute narrow-angle glaucoma, and retinal detachment. Eye injuries may lead to globe rupture or hyphema. Chemical exposures, especially from alkali substances, require prompt eye irrigation to minimize corneal injury. All these situations demand urgent assessment and intervention to avoid further harm or complications. These cases fulfill the criteria for ESI level 2. Although immediate flushing is crucial, it is not classified as life-saving, so these patients do not qualify for ESI level 1.

###### Orthopedic

Patients exhibiting signs and symptoms of compartment syndrome face a significant risk of losing the affected limb and should be categorized as ESI level 2. Other orthopedic injuries considered high-risk include any limb injury with impaired neurovascular status, partial or complete amputations, or injuries resulting from mechanisms known to be high-risk, such as severe acceleration or deceleration. Patients suspected of having fractures of the pelvis, femur, or hip, as well as those with other limb dislocations, require thorough assessment and monitoring of vital signs. These types of fractures can lead to substantial blood loss. If a patient is hemodynamically unstable and requires immediate life-saving intervention, they should be classified as ESI level 1.

###### Pediatrics

Triage nurses often feel uneasy when determining the acuity level for pediatric patients, particularly infants. Gathering a precise history from the caregiver and assessing the child’s activity are crucial steps. A child who cannot be comforted or appears withdrawn may be at significant risk for severe illness. The conditions listed below illustrate high-risk scenarios in children:

Convulsions.

Severe dehydration and sepsis.

A complication of diabetes characterized by high blood sugar, the presence of ketones, and acidosis.

Abuse of children, burn injuries.

Injury to the head.

Overdoses or ingestion of vitamins, iron, or other substances.

An infant younger than 28 days old who has a temperature of 100.4° F (38° C) or higher.

###### Transplant

Patients who have undergone organ transplantation are typically unwell and classified as high risk. They may develop organ rejection, sepsis, or other complications. Individuals awaiting transplantation are also generally regarded as high risk.

###### Respiratory

Numerous respiratory issues can put patients at significant risk. Those experiencing mild to moderate distress should undergo further assessment of their respiratory rate and pulse oximetry to decide if they should be classified as ESI level 2. Patients exhibiting severe respiratory distress who need immediate life-saving measures, such as intubation, qualify for level-1 categorization. A high-risk patient is someone who is currently breathing and oxygenating sufficiently but is in respiratory distress and could quickly worsen. Causes of respiratory distress may include asthma, pulmonary embolism, pleural effusion, pneumothorax, inhalation of toxic smoke, foreign body aspiration, or shortness of breath accompanied by chest pain.

###### Toxicological

The majority of patients presenting with an overdose require prompt assessment, as these cases are considered high risk. Identifying the specific substances ingested and their amounts is frequently challenging. If the overdose was intentional and the patient expresses suicidal thoughts, this also qualifies as a high-risk scenario. Patients who arrive without breathing or need urgent lifesaving measures should be assigned ESI level 1, while all other admitted overdose cases should be classified as ESI level 2.

###### Trauma

Patients who have experienced a traumatic event are often at significant risk for injury, even if no visible injuries are present. Any injury mechanism that carries a high risk should be classified as ESI level 2, unless the patient has unstable vital signs and needs immediate intervention, in which case they should be assigned ESI level 1. Serious injuries occur due to the transfer of mechanical or kinetic energy, typically from acceleration, deceleration, or both. Examples include motor vehicle and motorcycle accidents, falls, and gunshot or stab wounds, all of which involve blunt or penetrating trauma and require thorough assessment for possible severe injury. The triage nurse should gather information such as the patient’s age, any pre-existing medical conditions, environmental factors, the height of a fall or jump, the speed of the vehicle involved, any history of loss of consciousness, the site of a penetrating injury, and the type of weapon used. The nurse will use their understanding of biomechanics and injury mechanisms to evaluate the patient and determine if they meet ESI level 2 criteria. Gunshot wounds to the head, neck, chest, or groin generally necessitate trauma team involvement and immediate care, and should be triaged as ESI level 1.

###### Wound Management

What factors classify a wound as high risk? Is there ongoing, uncontrolled bleeding? Is there evidence of arterial bleeding? Does the injury involve a partial amputation? Consider how the wound occurred and whether the mechanism of injury puts the patient at increased risk for additional traumatic complications. The majority of wounds do not qualify for ESI level 2. For example, a patient with a stab wound to the thigh that only affects the subcutaneous tissue, has bleeding under control, and maintains good distal neurological status can be assigned to ESI level 4. However, any wound with uncontrolled bleeding that demands immediate, lifesaving intervention to stabilize the patient falls under level 1 criteria.

##### Confusion/Lethargy/ Disorientation

The second consideration when assessing if a patient qualifies for level-2 criteria is whether they are experiencing new confusion, lethargy, or disorientation. Changes in mental status are a common reason for seeking care. Patients with these symptoms are often brought to the emergency department by relatives, friends, or emergency personnel. At decision point B in the ESI algorithm, confusion, lethargy, or disorientation refers specifically to a recent or sudden change in consciousness. Ongoing dementia or chronic confusion does not satisfy the requirements for ESI level 2. Acute confusion, lethargy, or disorientation can result from several serious medical issues, such as stroke, transient ischemic attack, other brain structural abnormalities, metabolic or electrolyte disturbances like hypoglycemia or hyponatremia, and toxicological problems.

This part of the algorithm is typically straightforward and offers minimal room for misinterpretation. When a patient arrives at triage with an unknown medical history and is confused, lethargic, or disoriented, the triage nurse should presume these symptoms are new and assign an ESI level 2 triage category. Additionally, if the patient exhibits new confusion, lethargy, or disorientation and needs an immediate life-saving intervention as outlined earlier, they qualify for ESI level 1.

##### Severe Pain/Distress

The last consideration in deciding if the patient qualifies for level-2 is whether they are experiencing severe pain or distress. The patient must be evaluated for signs of significant pain or distress. Any patient reporting a pain score of 7 out of 10 or higher should be evaluated for ESI level-2 criteria.

The word "considered" holds significant importance. It is ultimately the triage nurse’s judgment to decide if the combination of the patient’s clinical condition and reported pain level justifies assigning an ESI level 2. For instance, a patient whose toe was struck by a heavy metal object might report their pain as 10 out of 10. The patient could indeed have a fracture and be in intense pain, and may not have attempted any pain relief before arriving at the emergency department. In this scenario, the appropriate triage level would be ESI level 4, as only one resource—an x-ray—will be required. The triage nurse should provide comfort measures at triage, such as applying ice, elevating the foot, and administering pain medication if protocols allow, to help alleviate the pain. The nurse should accept the patient’s report of severe pain and address it during triage. Nevertheless, this patient can safely wait to be seen and should not be prioritized for the last available bed. In conclusion, the triage nurse evaluates not just the patient’s reported pain score, but also considers the main complaint, medical history, and the patient’s physical presentation when assigning a triage level. Patients for whom severe pain could justify an ESI level 2 rating include:

A patient experiencing severe (10/10) flank pain and visibly writhing during triage.

An 80-year-old woman experiencing generalized abdominal pain rated 7 out of 10, accompanied by intense nausea.

A 30-year-old individual experiencing an acute pain crisis due to sickle cell disease.

A cancer patient experiencing intense pain.

Any burn, whether full-thickness or partial-thickness, that necessitates prompt pain management.

All emergency department patients should be evaluated for pain and asked to rate their pain using a tool like the visual analog scale. Many triage nurses feel uneasy about recording a patient’s pain score and then having the patient wait to be seen. It is crucial for triage nurses to recognize that a patient’s self-reported pain score is just one aspect of the overall pain assessment. For instance, triage nurses often encounter patients who appear comfortable—such as laughing, talking on the phone, or eating—yet claim their pain is 10 or higher. Triage nurses should assign an ESI level 2 if a patient reports a pain score of 7 out of 10 or more and the nurse’s subjective and objective evaluation indicates that the pain requires interventions beyond what can be provided at triage. In such cases, the triage nurse determines that it would not be appropriate for the patient to wait and assigns them to the last available bed.

Ultimately, when deciding if a patient qualifies for ESI level-2, the triage nurse needs to evaluate for severe distress, which can be either physiological or psychological. Beyond pain, patients with significant respiratory distress fulfill the physiological criteria for ESI level 2. Severe psychological distress may be seen in patients who are:

Overwhelmed with distress following a sexual assault.

Displaying disruptive behavior during triage.

Aggressive.

Individuals who have experienced domestic abuse.

Undergoing an intense response to grief.

These patients are typically prioritized by the triage nurse to be taken directly to the treatment area, allowing them to bypass the waiting room.

##### Summary

We have examined the essential elements and questions required to assess if a patient qualifies for ESI level-2. It is vital for the triage nurse to take these questions into account when evaluating every patient. Overlooking a high-risk scenario could lead to longer wait times and possibly adverse outcomes for the patient.

### Chapter 5. Expected Resource Needs

Historically, triage systems have relied exclusively on assessing the severity of a patient’s condition. In these systems, nurses determine an acuity level by judging how long a patient can safely wait before being evaluated by a healthcare provider. The Emergency Severity Index (ESI) introduces a different method by not only considering which patients require immediate attention, but also, for those with less severe conditions, estimating the resources that will likely be needed to manage their care. This chapter provides background on the rationale for incorporating resource prediction into the ESI, explains what is considered a resource, and offers examples of patients classified as ESI levels 3 to 5 along with the anticipated resources each will require.

Traditionally, comprehensive triage has served as the primary approach for assigning triage acuity in U.S. emergency departments (Emergency Nurses Association [ENA], 1997, pp. 3-10; Gilboy, Travers & Wuerz, 1999). These triage systems rely on the nurse’s evaluation of vital signs, both subjective and objective data, medical history, allergies, and current medications to establish the level of triage acuity.

Predicting resource needs is a key component of the ESI for patients categorized as ESI level 3, 4, or 5. It is essential to note that resource allocation is not considered for high-acuity patients, such as those at ESI level 1 or 2. Resource prediction sets the ESI apart from other triage systems that focus solely on acuity. When Drs. Wuerz and Eitel developed the ESI triage system, they incorporated resource utilization to provide additional information and enable more precise triage decisions. They believed that experienced emergency department (ED) triage nurses could anticipate the types and quantities of tests, treatments, and consultations a patient would require during their ED visit. This has been confirmed by recent studies on ESI implementation and validation, which have demonstrated that triage nurses can accurately predict the resource needs of ED patients (Eitel, Travers, Rosenau, Gilboy & Wuerz, 2003; Tanabe, Gimbel, Yarnold & Adams, 2004). One such study, conducted across seven EDs in diverse geographic locations, including both urban and rural settings as well as academic and community hospitals, found that nurses using the ESI correctly predicted the number of resources needed by ED patients 70 percent of the time. In other words, experienced triage nurses using the ESI can reliably estimate at triage how many resources a patient will need to reach a disposition in the ED, and, more importantly, can distinguish between patients who will require low versus high resource intensity. This ability to differentiate based on resource needs enables more efficient patient flow at ED presentation by directing patients into different operational pathways, facilitating parallel processing. Additionally, research has shown that ESI triage levels are associated with significant patient outcomes, such as admission and mortality rates (Eitel et al., 2003).

It is important to remember that resource prediction applies solely to patients who are less acutely ill. At decision points A and B in the ESI algorithm (Figure 5-1), the nurse determines if patients qualify for ESI levels 1 or 2 based exclusively on their acuity. In contrast, at decision point C, the nurse assigns ESI levels 3 through 5 by evaluating both the patient’s acuity and anticipated resource requirements. Therefore, the triage nurse takes resource needs into account only when the responses to decision points A and B are “no.”

To determine what resources an ED patient may require, the triage nurse should have a broad understanding of emergency department care standards and, more specifically, know what is considered reasonable and typical emergency care. One simple way to approach this is to consider, “Based on this patient’s main complaint, which resources are emergency providers most likely to use?”

The triage nurse relies on information gathered from a brief subjective and objective assessment, along with the patient’s medical history, current medications, age, and gender, to estimate how many resources the emergency department provider will require to make a decision about the patient’s care. For instance, a healthy teenager with a straightforward leg laceration and no significant medical history would likely need just one resource: suturing. Conversely, an elderly patient with several chronic conditions and no prior episodes of dizziness who arrives with a head laceration from a fall will obviously require multiple resources, such as suturing, laboratory tests, an ECG, imaging studies, or specialist consultations. Proper application of the ESI triage system depends on the nurse’s ability to anticipate the necessary resources, making it a task best suited for an experienced emergency nurse. Overall, regardless of the triage system in use, we maintain that triage should be conducted by a skilled emergency nurse to ensure patient safety.

Table 5-1 (also referenced as Table 3-1) outlines the guidelines for classifying resources within the ESI triage system. The distinction between ESI levels 3, 4, and 5 is based on the nurse’s assessment of the number of resources a patient will require for disposition. According to the triage nurse’s judgment, patients anticipated to need no resources are assigned to level 5, those expected to need one resource are placed in level 4, and patients likely to require two or more resources are categorized as ESI level 3. Research has shown that patients needing two or more resources experience higher rates of hospital admission, increased mortality, and longer emergency department stays (Eitel et al., 2003; Tanabe et al., 2004 Reliability and validity).

While Table 5-1 does not include every possible resource, it offers general direction regarding the types of diagnostic tests, procedures, and treatments that are considered resources within the ESI system. Emergency nurses using the ESI should avoid focusing too much on the specific definitions of each resource. The key point is that ESI only requires the triage nurse to estimate the resources a patient will likely need during their ED visit. Table 5-1 lists the most frequently used resources, but it is neither feasible nor necessary to list every potential ED resource. For accurate ESI assignment, it is sufficient to determine whether a patient will require no resources, one resource, or two or more resources. Once a triage nurse identifies two likely resources, further estimation is unnecessary. The main purpose of the ESI resource component is to distinguish patients with more complex, resource-intensive needs from those with simpler issues. For ESI triage, resources are defined as interventions that go beyond a basic exam or minor interventions by ED staff, or that involve personnel outside the ED. Resources that demand significant ED staff time (such as administering IV medications or inserting a chest tube) or require assistance from outside departments (like radiology for x-rays or surgical consultations) tend to increase the patient’s length of stay in the ED and reflect a higher level of patient complexity and triage category.

There are frequently asked questions regarding what qualifies as an ESI resource. One common question concerns how many blood or urine tests and x-rays count as a resource. According to the ESI triage system, the triage nurse should consider the number of different types of resources required to decide the patient’s disposition, rather than counting each individual test.

A complete blood count (CBC) and an electrolyte panel together make up a single laboratory test resource.

A complete blood count and a chest x-ray are two types of diagnostic tools (laboratory test and imaging).

A CBC and a urinalysis are both laboratory tests, and when performed together, they are considered a single resource.

A chest x-ray and standard skull radiographs are one type of resource (x-ray).

Cervical spine X-rays and a head CT scan are two imaging resources (an X-ray and a CT scan).

Another commonly debated resource is the use of a splint, which is not considered a resource. If it were, patients with ankle sprains would be classified as ESI level 3 (requiring an x-ray and splint). Although applying a splint can require significant effort, it is crucial to remember that resource prediction is solely intended to categorize patients and ensure they are directed to the appropriate area within the ED. In many emergency departments, ESI level-3 patients are not suitable for fast track or urgent care sections. Triage scores do not reflect the overall intensity of nursing workload.

Another frequently asked question about ESI resources concerns the inclusion of eye irrigation as a resource. Patients who experience a chemical splash to the eye are typically classified as ESI level-2 due to the high-risk nature of their injury, so the need for eye irrigation does not influence their ESI level. On the other hand, if the eye issue is caused by dust particles, the patient is not automatically considered high risk. In such cases, eye irrigation is counted as a resource, placing the patient at ESI level-4. The eye examination itself is not considered a resource since it is part of the standard physical exam. Additional questions about resources are discussed in the Frequently Asked Questions section of Chapter 5 in Appendix A.

Clinicians often ask about the items categorized as “not resources” in Table 5-1. This list is designed to help triage nurses efficiently and accurately assign patients to one of five clinically distinct levels (Wuerz, Milne, Eitel, Travers & Gilboy, 2000). Items considered not to be resources include physical examinations, point-of-care testing, and procedures that generally do not increase a patient’s length of stay in the emergency department or suggest greater complexity. Because it is standard practice for all ED patients to receive a basic history and physical exam, these assessments—including pelvic exams—are not counted as resources for ESI classification. The strength of the ESI lies in its straightforwardness; the main aim of determining resources is to distinguish patients with more complex needs who require two or more resources (level 3 or higher) from those with less complicated issues who will likely need fewer than two resources (level 4 or 5). Emergency nurses should avoid overcomplicating the ESI by focusing too much on the specifics of resource definitions. In most cases, a patient will need either no resources, one resource, or two or more resources.

Although the use of resources can differ depending on the location, provider, or even the specific patient, triage nurses are encouraged to base their ESI resource predictions on the typical management of the most frequent presenting issues. Ideally, any patient arriving at an emergency department should require a similar range of resources. For instance, if a provider evaluates an 82-year-old nursing home resident with an indwelling urinary catheter who presents with fever and cough, it is likely that blood tests, urine tests, and a chest x-ray will be ordered. The triage nurse can reasonably anticipate that this patient will need two or more resources and should therefore assign an ESI level 3.

While there may be slight differences in procedures among various emergency departments, these usually do not significantly impact the triage rating. For instance, some departments perform pregnancy tests within the ED (which is not considered a resource by ESI), while others send the tests to the lab (which is considered a resource by ESI). However, it is uncommon for patients to require only a pregnancy test, as most will need at least one or two additional resources. One variation in ED practices that could lead to different ESI levels is how patients with a sole complaint of sore throat are managed. In some hospitals, it is standard to take throat cultures (counted as one resource, ESI level 4), whereas in others, this is not routinely done (no resources, ESI level 5). Another example of practice variation is the application of the Ottawa Ankle Rules, which are evidence-based guidelines to decide if an ankle x-ray is necessary for patients with ankle injuries. The extent to which these rules are used differs between institutions. Facilities that implement these rules during triage may order fewer x-rays compared to those that do not regularly use them.

Temperature is a key factor in evaluating the allocation of resources for infants and young children. This topic will be discussed in Chapter 6.

Clinically, patients classified as ESI level 4 and 5 can wait several hours before being seen by a provider. However, from a customer service perspective, these patients may be more appropriately managed in a fast-track or urgent care environment. Mid-level practitioners with the right skill set and supervision are capable of treating level-4 and 5 patients. The ESI system also offers an operational benefit, as level-5 patients can occasionally be accommodated for a brief evaluation and disposition by a provider, even when the department is full. Frequently, triage policies specify that ESI level-4 or 5 patients may be directed to an urgent care or fast-track area.

In conclusion, the ESI introduces a novel method for emergency department triage by incorporating predictions regarding the number of resources required to determine patient disposition. For patients classified as ESI levels 3, 4, and 5, resource needs are factored into the triage level, whereas decisions for ESI levels 1 and 2 rely solely on the severity of the patient’s condition. Table 5-2 provides examples of patients in ESI levels 3, 4, and 5. In practice, estimating resource needs has proven highly useful for managing the large volume of patients presenting with non-acute issues.

### Chapter 6.The Role of Vital Signs in ESI Triage

##### Introduction Figure 6-1. Danger Zone Vital Signs

This chapter centers on decision point D, which involves evaluating the patient's vital signs. By this stage in the ESI algorithm, the triage nurse has already established that the patient does not qualify for ESI level 1 or 2 and will need two or more resources. Because the patient requires at least two resources, they are classified as at least ESI level 3. At this juncture, the nurse reviews the patient's vital signs, including heart rate, respiratory rate, and oxygen saturation, and, for children under three, temperature. If any of the vital signs exceed the danger zone thresholds (as shown in decision point D, Figure 6-1), the nurse should seriously consider upgrading the patient from level 3 to level 2.

In the ESI triage training program, significant time should be allocated to discussing how vital signs impact the decision to reclassify a patient from ESI level 3 to level 2. It is important to emphasize that the experienced triage nurse is ultimately responsible for determining if a patient qualifies for ESI level 2, taking into account the patient’s medical history, current medications, and both subjective and objective assessments, including overall appearance. This determination relies on the nurse’s clinical expertise and understanding of normal vital sign ranges for all age groups, as well as the effects of factors like medications, medical history, and pain levels.

##### What Are Vital Signs?

Vital signs are typically basic measurements of physiological functions such as temperature, blood pressure, pulse, respiratory rate, and pulse oximetry (refer to Table 6-1). These measurements often guide healthcare professionals in choosing a specific course of action. In recent years, nursing literature has increasingly highlighted the significance of pain, with the American Pain Society coining the term “Pain: the fifth vital sign” to raise awareness among healthcare providers about the need to assess and manage pain. Pain evaluation is a key part of the ESI and is actually considered earlier in its process. For ESI purposes, the vital sign parameters used at decision point D for children under three years old include heart rate, respiratory rate, oxygen saturation, and temperature. Vital signs provide objective information that helps determine a patient’s general health status and viability. The readings we collect shape our understanding of a patient’s overall condition and influence our diagnostic and treatment decisions. Nevertheless, vital signs alone do not offer a complete assessment of a patient’s state. They can be influenced by various factors, such as prescription drugs, herbal supplements, and recreational substances. For instance, beta-blockers can cause a slower heart rate and mask the typical rapid heart rate seen in shock. Hypothyroidism, especially in older adults, may result in low body temperature even during severe infections like sepsis. Similarly, a young adult’s high temperature could be due to recreational drug use.

Vital signs are fluctuating, dynamic markers that supplement a patient’s assessment. Their measurement can depend on the person taking them, and what is considered normal varies depending on the source referenced. Even in optimal circumstances, vital signs may not always be dependable or precise (Edmonds, Mower, Lovato & Lomeli, 2002). Often, the patient’s overall appearance and clinical context are most informative. Nevertheless, if a triage nurse believes that knowing a patient’s vital signs would assist in evaluating risk, then they should be recorded. For instance, if a patient is on immunosuppressive drugs, undergoing chemotherapy, or has an illness like AIDS that suppresses the immune system, it is important to check their body temperature.

##### Are Vital Signs Necessary at Triage?

Before the introduction of five-level triage in the United States, it was customary for all patients arriving at an emergency department to have their vital signs measured prior to being assigned a triage level. Vital signs were viewed as a crucial part of the initial nursing evaluation and frequently guided decision-making. In the traditional three-level triage system, vital signs played a key role in determining how long a patient could safely wait for care; if vital signs were normal, patients were often allowed to wait longer. As a result, vital signs historically carried significant weight in triage assessments, sometimes more so than the patient’s clinical presentation.

In recent years, updated triage models have recommended the selective use of vital signs during triage (Gilboy, Travers & Wuerz, 2000). Collecting initial vital signs is not a required part of other five-level triage systems and is generally not performed during the triage of level-1 or level-2 patients, who are the most critically ill. For instance, the Guidelines for Implementation of the Australasian Triage Scale in Emergency Departments specify that “vital signs should only be measured at triage if required to estimate urgency, or if time permits” (Australasian College for Emergency Medicine, 2000). Likewise, the Canadian Triage and Acuity Scale (CTAS) states that vital signs are only necessary if they are needed to determine the triage level, particularly for levels 3, 4, and 5, and only if time allows (Beveridge et al., 2002). The Manchester Triage Group incorporates specific vital sign criteria as decision points within its flow chart, using them as one of several factors to help the triage nurse determine the patient’s acuity level.

Vital signs are not always the best method for determining triage acuity. Some research indicates that taking vital signs may not be essential during the initial triage assessment. In 2002, Cooper, Flaherty, Lin, and Hubbell investigated how vital signs influence triage status, also taking into account factors like age and communication skills. Their study involved over 14,000 patients across 24 U.S. emergency departments. The findings revealed that vital signs altered the triage acuity level in only 8% of cases. When looking more closely at specific age groups, children aged 2 or younger experienced the greatest change in triage decisions, with an 11.4% shift after vital signs were obtained.

##### Vital Signs and ESI Triage

With ESI triage, the only strict requirement to check vital signs applies to patients who do not initially qualify for ESI level 1 or 2, but are expected to need two or more resources. For patients assigned to ESI levels 1, 2, 4, or 5, taking vital signs at triage is optional and left to the triage nurse’s judgment. Although the ESI system does not mandate vital sign assessment for every patient at triage, individual institutions may have their own protocols. Hospital policies on vital sign assessment at triage are shaped by factors like staffing, patient mix, and available resources, which are not addressed in this handbook. Generally, it is always acceptable to take vital signs when triaging a stable patient. According to ESI, only level-3 patients are required to have vital signs checked. (Refer to Table 6-2)

The creators of the ESI and the current research team agree that experienced emergency department nurses can incorporate vital sign information alongside their clinical judgment when assigning ESI ratings to patients. However, there is limited evidence linking abnormal vital signs to emergency department acuity or confirming that these abnormalities reliably indicate serious illness. Over time, the ESI has been updated to incorporate new evidence and recommendations from the literature. Initially, the ESI working group relied on systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS) research (Rangel-Frausto et al., 1995) to develop the danger zone vital sign criteria and related footnotes. The first ESI version used SIRS criteria, designating a heart rate above 90 in adults as a definitive reason to upgrade a patient from ESI level 3 to level 2 (Wuerz, Milne, Eitel, Travers & Gilboy, 2000). Since the SIRS studies focused on mortality predictors in intensive care unit patients, applying these criteria in the ED led to too many false positives. As a result, the heart rate threshold was increased to 100 in ESI version 2, and nurses were advised to consider upgrading adult patients with heart rates over 100 to ESI level 2 (Wuerz et al., 2001; Gilboy, Tanabe, Travers, Eitel & Wuerz, 2003). The danger zone vital sign criteria were also expanded to include pediatric vital signs.

When applying the ESI triage system, it is not required to assess vital signs in the triage area for patients who are immediately assigned to level 1 or 2. If a patient appears unstable or has a primary complaint that demands urgent intervention, they should be quickly moved to the treatment area. In these cases, the resuscitation team will take and monitor vital signs at the bedside. This includes patients whose clinical presentation suggests a high risk or an immediate need for cardiovascular or respiratory support, such as those who look pale, sweaty, or cyanotic. Nevertheless, the triage nurse may choose to check vital signs in the triage area if there is no available bed or if they believe that vital sign data could help determine the correct triage level. Some patients may only be recognized as ESI level 1 after their vital signs are measured. For instance, an elderly patient who is awake and alert but complains of dizziness might be found to have a critical condition if their heart rate is discovered to be 32 or 180 during the assessment.

As outlined in the ESI algorithm in Chapter 3, when patients do not qualify for ESI level-1 or 2, the triage nurse proceeds to decision point C. At this stage, the nurse evaluates how many resources the patient is likely to require in the emergency department. If only one or no resources are anticipated, the patient can be categorized as ESI level 4 or 5, and a vital sign check is not needed. However, if two or more resources are expected to be necessary, the nurse moves to decision point D, where vital signs should be measured. Vital signs are particularly significant for some patients during triage, especially those assigned to ESI level 3, as their values can provide additional evidence of possible serious illness. If any vital signs fall within the danger zone, it is advised that the triage nurse consider upgrading the patient’s triage level from 3 to 2.

The ESI triage system specifically includes heart rate, respiratory rate, and oxygen saturation (for patients who may have respiratory issues) as vital signs. Temperature is only considered for children younger than three years old. It is important to recognize that abnormal blood pressure is not part of the ESI triage criteria. However, this does not mean that triage nurses should avoid measuring blood pressure or temperature in older children or adults; rather, these measurements are not typically used to determine the correct triage acuity level.

##### Vital Signs and Pediatric Fever

In this edition of the ESI Handbook, version 4 (v.4) of the ESI algorithm has been revised to reflect updated pediatric fever guidelines. As illustrated in Figure 6-2, note D of the ESI algorithm covers pediatric fever criteria relevant to ESI triage. This part includes guidance from the American College of Emergency Physicians’ Clinical Policy for Children Under Three Years Old Presenting to the Emergency Department With Fever (ACEP, 2003).

The ESI Triage Research Team advises that vital signs should be checked in patients younger than 3 years old during triage. Specifically, taking a temperature is crucial for all children from birth up to 36 months, and assessing vital signs is a key part of evaluating any infant under 36 months with a known fever (Baraff, 2000). This process helps distinguish between ESI level-2 and level-3 patients and reduces the chance that children who may have bacteremia are inappropriately directed to express care or made to wait too long. It is important to note that any patient who is at immediate risk or in serious danger will be categorized as ESI level 1 or 2.

Table 6-3 offers guidance for triage nurses on using the ESI to evaluate febrile children and select the most suitable triage level. Fever is commonly defined as a rectal temperature above 38.0° C (100.4° F) (Baraff et al., 1993; ACEP, 2003). Infants younger than 28 days with a fever should be regarded as high risk and given at least an ESI level 2. For infants aged 28 days to 3 months, there are no definitive guidelines. The ESI research team advises triage nurses to follow their hospital’s protocols, but suggests considering at least an ESI level 2 for these patients.

In version 4 of the ESI, we have adopted a different set of guidelines for managing fever in children aged 3 to 36 months. These guidelines focus on children with high fevers, defined as a temperature above 39.0° C (102.2° F) (ACEP, 2003). When evaluating a highly febrile child in this age group, the triage nurse should determine the child’s immunization status and whether there is a clear source for the fever. If the child is not fully immunized or if no source for the fever can be identified, the child should be categorized as at least ESI level 3. If the child’s immunizations are current and there is an identifiable cause for the fever, an ESI level of 4 or 5 is suitable. For instance, a 7-month-old who is under pediatric care, has received the Haemophilus influenza type b (HIB) vaccine, and presents with a fever while tugging at his ear could be assigned to ESI level 5.

##### Case Examples

The case studies below illustrate how vital signs information is utilized during ESI triage.

A healthy-appearing 28-year-old woman states, “My doctor said I’m approximately 6 weeks pregnant, and now I believe I might be having a miscarriage.” She explains, “I began spotting this morning and am now experiencing cramps.” She has no allergies or past medical history and is taking prenatal vitamins. Her vital signs are: temperature 98°F, heart rate 112, respiratory rate 22, and blood pressure 90/60.

This patient qualifies for an upgrade from level 3 to level 2 triage due to her vital signs. Her elevated heart rate and respiratory rate, along with low blood pressure, are worrisome. These symptoms may suggest internal hemorrhage caused by a ruptured ectopic pregnancy.

The mother of a 15-month-old reports that her baby has been experiencing diarrhea since the previous day. She mentions that everyone in the family has recently had the gastrointestinal virus that is circulating. According to her, the baby’s appetite has decreased, there has been a mild fever, and the child has passed several watery stools. The baby is calmly sitting on the mother’s lap. The triage nurse observes evidence of dehydration. The child has no past medical history, no known drug allergies, and is not taking any medications. Vital signs are: temperature 100.4°F, heart rate 142, respiratory rate 48, and blood pressure 76/50.

This patient qualifies for at least ESI level 3. He will need laboratory tests and intravenous fluids as resources. Given his vital signs, the triage nurse may escalate him to ESI level 2. In an infant of this age, both heart rate and respiratory rate exceed the normal limits.

A 57-year-old woman states, “I need to see a doctor about my cough. I can’t seem to get rid of it. I barely slept last night because I was coughing so much, and now I’m extremely tired.” She mentions having a fever of 101° last night and is producing yellow sputum when she coughs. Her medical history includes a hysterectomy three years ago; she is not on any medications but is allergic to penicillin. Her vital signs are: temperature 101.4°, respiratory rate 28, heart rate 100, and oxygen saturation 90 percent.

At the start of her triage evaluation, this patient appears to possibly have pneumonia. She is likely to require two or more resources, but her low oxygen levels and rapid breathing are worrisome. Based on her vital signs, the triage nurse should upgrade her to an ESI level 2.

A 34-year-old obese woman arrives at triage with complaints of diffuse abdominal pain rated 6 out of 10, ongoing for the past two days. She reports multiple episodes of vomiting and notes that her last bowel movement was three days ago. Her medical history includes back surgery; she is not on any medications and has a peanut allergy. Her vital signs are: temperature 97.8°F, heart rate 104, respiratory rate 16, blood pressure 132/80, and oxygen saturation 99%.

This patient will require at least two resources, such as laboratory tests, intravenous fluids, possibly IV medication for nausea, and a CT scan. The triage nurse should assess the patient’s vital signs, paying attention to the heart rate. Although the heart rate is slightly outside the normal range for the patient’s age, this may be attributed to pain or physical activity. Therefore, the appropriate action is to categorize the patient as ESI level 3.

A crying 9-year-old arrives at triage with her mother after slipping on an icy sidewalk and hurting her right forearm. The forearm appears clearly deformed, but circulation, sensation, and movement are intact. According to her mother, the child has no allergies, is not on any medications, and is otherwise healthy. Her vital signs are: blood pressure 100/68, heart rate 124, respiratory rate 32, and oxygen saturation 99 percent.

The child is in pain from her fall and is clearly distressed. She will need at least two resources: an x-ray and an orthopedic consultation, and possibly conscious sedation. Although her heart rate and breathing are increased, the triage nurse can confidently assign her to ESI level 3. The changes in her vital signs are most likely caused by pain and emotional upset.

A 72-year-old woman arrives at the emergency department using nasal cannula oxygen for her advanced COPD. She tells the triage nurse that she has an infected cat bite on her left hand, which appears red, swollen, and tender. She has no other health issues, uses albuterol as needed, and takes a daily aspirin. She has no known drug allergies. Her vital signs are: temperature 99.6°F, heart rate 88, respiratory rate 22, blood pressure 138/80, and oxygen saturation 91%. She reports no difficulty breathing.

This patient needs at least two resources: laboratory tests and intravenous antibiotics. She qualifies for ESI level 3. Although the triage nurse observes that her oxygen saturation and respiratory rate fall outside the normal adult range, the patient has advanced COPD. Therefore, these vital signs are not worrisome, and she will remain at ESI level 3 rather than being up-triaged.

##### Case Examples

The case studies below illustrate how vital signs information is utilized during ESI triage.

A healthy-appearing 28-year-old woman states, “My doctor said I’m around 6 weeks pregnant, and now I believe I might be having a miscarriage.” She reports that she began spotting earlier today and is now experiencing cramping. She has no allergies or past medical history and is taking prenatal vitamins. Her vital signs are: temperature 98°F, heart rate 112, respiratory rate 22, and blood pressure 90/60.

This patient qualifies for an upgrade from level 3 to level 2 triage due to her vital signs. Her elevated heart rate and respiratory rate, along with low blood pressure, are worrisome. These symptoms may suggest internal hemorrhage caused by a ruptured ectopic pregnancy.

The mother of a 15-month-old reports that her baby has been experiencing diarrhea since the previous day. She mentions that everyone in the family has recently had the gastrointestinal virus that is circulating. The baby has shown reduced appetite, a mild fever, and several episodes of watery stools. The child is calmly sitting on the mother’s lap. The triage nurse observes indications of dehydration. There is no past medical history, no known drug allergies, and the baby is not on any medications. Vital signs are: temperature 100.4°F, heart rate 142, respiratory rate 48, and blood pressure 76/50.

This patient qualifies for at least ESI level 3. He will need laboratory tests and intravenous fluids as resources. Given his vital signs, the triage nurse may escalate him to ESI level 2. For an infant of this age, both heart rate and respiratory rate fall outside the normal range.

A 57-year-old woman states, “I need to see a doctor about my cough. I just can’t get rid of it. I barely slept last night because I was coughing so much, and now I’m extremely tired.” She mentions having a fever of 101° last night and is producing yellow sputum when she coughs. Her medical history includes a hysterectomy three years ago; she is not on any medications but is allergic to Penicillin. Her vital signs are: temperature 101.4°, respiratory rate 28, heart rate 100, and oxygen saturation 90 percent.

At the start of her triage evaluation, this patient appears to possibly have pneumonia. She is likely to require two or more resources, but her low oxygen levels and rapid breathing are worrisome. Based on her vital signs, the triage nurse should upgrade her to an ESI level 2.

A 34-year-old obese woman arrives at triage with complaints of diffuse abdominal pain rated 6 out of 10, ongoing for the past two days. She reports multiple episodes of vomiting and notes that her last bowel movement was three days ago. Her medical history includes back surgery; she is not on any medications and has a peanut allergy. Her vital signs are: temperature 97.8°F, heart rate 104, respiratory rate 16, blood pressure 132/80, and oxygen saturation 99%.

This patient will require at least two resources, such as laboratory tests, intravenous fluids, possibly IV medication for nausea, and a CT scan. The triage nurse should assess the patient’s vital signs, paying particular attention to the heart rate. Although the heart rate is slightly outside the normal range for the patient’s age, this may be attributed to pain or physical activity. Therefore, the appropriate action is to categorize the patient as ESI level 3.

A crying 9-year-old arrives at triage with her mother after slipping on an icy sidewalk and hurting her right forearm. The forearm appears clearly deformed, but circulation, sensation, and movement are intact. According to her mother, she has no allergies, is not on any medications, and is otherwise healthy. Her vital signs are: blood pressure 100/68, heart rate 124, respiratory rate 32, and oxygen saturation 99 percent.

The child is in pain from her fall and is clearly distressed. She will need at least two resources: an x-ray and an orthopedic consultation, and possibly conscious sedation. Although her heart rate and breathing are increased, the triage nurse can confidently assign her to ESI level 3. The changes in her vital signs are most likely caused by pain and emotional upset.

A 72-year-old woman arrives at the emergency department using nasal cannula oxygen for her advanced COPD. She tells the triage nurse that she has an infected cat bite on her left hand, which appears red, swollen, and tender. She has no other health issues, uses albuterol as needed, and takes a daily aspirin. She has no known drug allergies. Her vital signs are: temperature 99.6°F, heart rate 88, respiratory rate 22, blood pressure 138/80, and oxygen saturation 91%. She reports no difficulty breathing.

This patient needs at least two resources: laboratory tests and intravenous antibiotics. She qualifies for ESI level 3. Although the triage nurse observes that her oxygen saturation and respiratory rate fall outside the normal adult range, the patient has advanced COPD. Therefore, these vital signs are not worrisome, and she will remain at ESI level 3 without being up-triaged.

##### Conclusion

This chapter lays the groundwork for comprehending how vital signs are used within the Emergency Severity Index triage system. We discussed the unique considerations for patients younger than 36 months. Additional research is needed to determine the most appropriate vital sign thresholds for emergency department triage. Ongoing studies will also focus on pediatric patients arriving at the emergency department. We anticipate that future updates to the ESI will incorporate more evidence about how well triage vital signs predict outcomes for both pediatric and adult patients.

### Appendix A. Frequently Asked Questions

##### Chapter 3.

###### Frequently Asked Questions

1. Is it necessary to raise the triage level for an adult patient if their heart rate exceeds 100?

No, it is something to take into account.

2. Is it necessary to increase a patient’s triage level if their pain score is 7 out of 10 or higher?

No, this is just one aspect to take into account.

3. Should a patient who is chronically confused always be assigned to ESI level 2?

No, patients experiencing a sudden change in consciousness are classified as ESI level 2.

4. At what times should vital signs be measured?

For any patient classified as ESI level-3, vital signs are always taken if the triage nurse believes they could be helpful.

##### Chapter 4.

###### Frequently Asked Questions

Am I required to assign an ESI triage level of 2 to a 25-year-old woman who reports her pain as 10 out of 10 but is eating potato chips?

No. Since her vital signs are stable and she doesn’t meet any high-risk criteria, this patient should be categorized as ESI level 3. She will probably require lab tests and at least two resources, such as x-rays, an IV, or pain medication. Therefore, you should not allocate your last available bed to her.

Should an 80-year-old woman with ongoing confusion be assigned an ESI level 2 during triage?

No. The sudden appearance of confusion, lethargy, or disorientation qualifies for ESI level 2.

3. Shouldn’t a patient experiencing active chest pain be assigned an ESI level 1? After all, they ought to receive the highest priority.

Not every patient presenting with chest pain qualifies for ESI level-1. Patients who are unresponsive, without a pulse, not breathing, or in need of urgent life-saving measures fall under level-1. Those with chest pain who appear pale, sweaty, have low blood pressure, or slow heart rate and need rapid IV access to stabilize their condition are also considered level-1. Patients who are stable but experiencing ongoing chest pain generally meet high-risk criteria and should be assigned ESI level 2, with prompt placement arranged.

##### Chapter 5.

###### Frequently Asked Questions

1. Why isn’t teaching someone how to use crutches considered a resource?

Although teaching patients how to use crutches can take up a significant amount of the emergency department staff’s time, this instruction is frequently given to individuals with uncomplicated ankle sprains. These cases are generally categorized as ESI level 4 (ankle x-ray = one resource). Such patients are clearly less acute and require fewer resources compared to more complicated cases, such as those with tibia or fibula fractures, who are typically classified as ESI level 3 (leg x-rays, orthopedic consultation, casting or splinting, IV pain management = two or more resources). Using a nursing resource intensity measure would more accurately capture the effort ED staff put into providing crutch-walking instruction.

2. Why doesn’t a splint qualify as a resource?

Using basic, pre-made splints (like those for ankle sprains) does not count as a resource. However, when ED staff create and apply splints—such as thumb spica splints for thumb fractures—this is considered a resource. To distinguish between patients with extremity injuries: those suspected of having fractures should be assigned ESI level 3 (requiring two or more resources, such as x-rays, pain medication, and the creation and application of splints or casts), while those likely to have simple sprains should be classified as ESI level 4.

3. Why isn’t a saline or heparin lock considered a resource?

In general, placing a heparin lock does not take up much time for the emergency department staff. Nevertheless, most patients who receive heparin locks also require at least two additional resources, such as lab tests or IV medications, which means they are typically categorized as ESI level 3 regardless.

Are all patients undergoing conscious sedation classified as ESI level 3 or above?

Conscious sedation is regarded as a complex procedure (requiring two resources) and is typically carried out on patients who are also undergoing laboratory tests, x-rays, or additional interventions like fracture reduction or dilation and curettage.

5. Are eye irrigation, administration of nebulized medications, and blood transfusions classified as resources?

All three are regarded as resources when assigning ESI triage ratings. These resources are typically utilized for patients with more acute conditions, demand considerable time from ED staff, and are likely to result in longer patient stays.

6. Do all patients with asthma fall under ESI level 4 since they will need nebulized treatment?

No. Asthma patients who are stable and only need nebulized medication are classified as ESI level 4. Some, however, experience severe respiratory distress and qualify for ESI level 2. Others fall in between, needing intravenous steroids or an x-ray along with nebulized treatments, and are categorized as ESI level 3. Lastly, those who just need a prescription refill for their inhaler are placed in ESI level 5, as they do not need any resources.

##### Chapter 6.

###### Frequently Asked Questions

Why is it unnecessary to obtain vital signs when triaging patients classified as ESI level 1 or 2?

Vital signs are not required to classify patients as life-threatening (ESI level 1) or high-risk (ESI level 2). Because patients at ESI levels 1 and 2 are in critical condition, they need an immediate response from the medical team. Multiple actions can take place at the same time, and vital signs may be obtained during the initial evaluation in the main acute section of the emergency department.

2. Why are vital signs not mandatory for patients classified as ESI level-4 and 5?

Vital signs are not required to classify patients as low or no resource (ESI level 4 or 5). Additionally, the pain, anxiety, and discomfort experienced during an emergency department visit can often affect a patient’s vital signs, which may normalize soon after the initial evaluation. However, if there are indications of abnormal symptoms—such as altered skin color, mental status changes, dizziness, or sweating—a nurse may decide to check vital signs. In the absence of any physical signs suggesting the need for vital sign assessment, the patient can be directed to the main emergency department or an express care room.

3. What is the reason for taking vital signs on patients classified as ESI level-3?

Vital signs help distinguish between patients who require multiple resources and are stable (ESI level 3) and those who may be unstable or at higher risk (ESI level 2). Sometimes, patients classified as ESI level 3 may actually have unstable vital signs despite appearing stable. For ESI level-3 patients, checking vital signs acts as an important safety measure. Typically, ESI level-3 patients have more complex conditions and many end up being admitted to the hospital. Because they are not suitable for the fast-track area, these patients may have to wait longer for definitive care. They pose a particular challenge during triage, making it essential for caregivers to use vital signs to ensure the correct ESI level is assigned.

4. Why are temperatures always taken for pediatric patients under 36 months of age?

Temperature helps distinguish pediatric patients who require few or no resources (ESI level 4 or 5) from those likely to need multiple resources. In infants under three months old, an abnormal temperature can suggest bacteremia and categorize the child as high risk.

5. Why does the literature offer differing perspectives on the importance of vital signs in the triage process?

There is no conclusive evidence regarding the usefulness of vital signs in emergency department triage. Numerous factors can impact the reliability of vital sign measurements, which are somewhat dependent on the person performing the assessment. In certain situations, vital signs can be influenced by factors like long-term medication use (such as beta-blockers). Additionally, vital signs may serve to meet some public health responsibilities that emergency departments have. Finally, they assist in categorizing young pediatric patients into different groups.

6. Does JCAHO mandate that vital signs be taken during triage?

The Joint Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations does not explicitly define a standard for vital signs. However, it does state that physiologic parameters should be evaluated based on the patient’s condition.

7. Should the vital sign thresholds in the danger zone box be strictly enforced?

In everyday practice, surpassing the danger zone vital sign thresholds leads to up-triage being “considered” instead of being done automatically. The skilled triage nurse must apply sound clinical judgment when assigning the patient’s ESI level. This decision involves evaluating the patient’s vital signs, medical history, medications, and overall clinical presentation. Further research is necessary to establish how well vital signs at triage predict outcomes and to define exact thresholds for up-triage.

8. What should be done if patients classified as ESI level-4 or 5 exhibit danger zone vital signs?

Although recording vital signs is not mandatory for assigning ESI levels 4 or 5, many patients may still have their vitals checked during triage if that aligns with the emergency department’s procedures. According to the ESI triage guidelines, the triage nurse is not required to consider vital signs when determining if a patient qualifies for ESI level 5 (no resources) or level 4 (one resource). Nonetheless, in real-world settings, a careful nurse will apply clinical judgment and may factor in vital sign data when assigning the ESI level. For example, if a patient only needs a prescription refill, has no acute symptoms, and presents with a heart rate of 104 after walking to the ED, the nurse may still assign an ESI level 5. Conversely, if the same patient has a heart rate of 148 and it is irregular, the nurse should assign an ESI level 2. The triage nurse must also address situations such as elevated blood pressure in a patient otherwise classified as ESI level 4 or 5. If the patient has no symptoms related to the high blood pressure, the triage level should remain unchanged. Typically, elevated blood pressure in an asymptomatic patient will not be managed in the ED, but it is important to refer the patient to a primary care provider for further evaluation and long-term management.

# Emergency Severity Index, Version 4: Implementation Handbook

### Note from the Director

The Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality is proud to present the Emergency Severity Index, Version 4: Implementation Handbook. This guide details every aspect of the Emergency Severity Index (ESI), a five-level triage system used in emergency departments to categorize patients into five groups—ranging from 1 (most urgent) to 5 (least urgent)—based on the severity of their condition and the resources they require.

Following the creation of the ESI by emergency physicians Richard Wuerz and David Eitel in 1998 and successful pilot testing, the ESI Triage Group was established. Additional development of the ESI was supported by a grant from AHRQ. This group, made up of clinicians, managers, educators, and researchers, continued to improve the algorithm into its current form.

Aligned with our mission to enhance the quality, safety, efficiency, and effectiveness of health care for all Americans, AHRQ places a strong focus on training. Together with the included two DVDs, this handbook offers essential support to emergency department nurses, physicians, and administrators in establishing a thorough ESI educational program. The resources are based on ESI Version 4, which features updates to the algorithm, particularly expanding the criteria for ESI level 1 and refining the guidelines for pediatric fever.

An effectively executed ESI program enables hospital emergency departments to quickly recognize patients requiring urgent care, more accurately identify those who can be safely and efficiently treated in a fast-track or urgent care setting instead of the main ED, and more precisely establish criteria for diverting ambulance patients away from the ED.

We hope this tool proves helpful as you continue working to enhance the quality of care in your emergency department.

### Chapter 2.Triage Acuity Systems

##### Standardization of Triage Acuity

Despite the fact that U.S. emergency departments (EDs) receive over 110 million visits annually (McCaig & Burt, 2004), there is a lack of comprehensive data on these visits at the local, regional, or national scale. This scarcity of information makes it challenging to address key questions such as “Which EDs treat the most critically ill patients?” and “What impact does patient acuity have on ED overcrowding?” As a result, there is increasing interest in developing standardized ED data systems in the United States to enhance clinical care, facilitate ED monitoring, enable benchmarking, and support research efforts (Barthell, Coonan, Finnell, Pollock, & Cochrane, 2004; Gilboy, Travers & Wuerz, 1999; Handler et al., 2004; National Center for Injury Prevention and Control).

A key data point in the emergency department is triage acuity, described by the Data Elements for Emergency Department Systems Task Force as the categorization of a patient's severity, indicating how much their condition threatens life or limb and if urgent intervention is required to relieve symptoms (NCIPC, 1997, p. 94).

There is significant inconsistency among emergency department triage acuity systems, especially in the United States (Emergency Nurses Association [ENA], 1997). Different systems use various terms to describe triage categories, and there is no universal agreement on the definitions for each level. Table 2-1 provides examples of acuity rating systems. Due to the absence of standardized triage acuity data in the U.S., it is understandable that the emergency department has been referred to as a “black box” of crucial public health information that remains mostly inaccessible in its current state (Martinez, 1995).

The Emergency Severity Index (ESI) is an innovative tool for assessing triage acuity in emergency departments. Research has demonstrated its consistency across various EDs, including those in both urban and rural areas, as well as in academic and community hospitals (Eitel, Travers, Rosenau, Gilboy & Wuerz, 2003). With widespread adoption in U.S. emergency departments, the ESI could become the standard method for triage acuity assessment. This chapter outlines the traditional triage systems used in U.S. EDs and reviews the research related to those systems. It then provides a brief overview of recent triage approaches developed in Australia, Canada, and the United Kingdom. The chapter ends with an examination of studies on the new ESI triage system and explores its potential advantages.

##### Triage Systems in the United States

Although numerous hospitals in the United States continue to utilize three- or four-level triage systems, there is a movement toward adopting five-level systems. The National Center for Health Statistics intends to substitute four-level triage data with five-level data in upcoming national benchmarking surveys of U.S. emergency departments. This change is driven by increasing evidence that five-level triage acuity data are more reliable and valid compared to three-level systems (personal communication, Linda McCaig, National Center for Health Statistics, October 6, 2004).

Both the ENA and the American College of Emergency Physicians (ACEP) have endorsed the use of five-level triage systems in U.S. emergency departments. In 2003, a joint task force from ENA and ACEP was formed to review the evidence regarding five-level triage systems, and their work is still in progress. That same year, ACEP and ENA released a joint statement.

ACEP and ENA believe that patient care quality would improve by introducing a standardized triage scale and acuity classification system in emergency departments. Drawing on expert consensus and current evidence, ACEP and ENA endorse the use of a dependable, validated five-level triage scale (ACEP, 2003; ENA, 2003).

A 2005 task force paper recommended both the ESI and the Canadian Triage and Acuity Scale (CTAS) as reliable and valid triage methods (Fernandes et al., 2005). With increasing evidence favoring five-level triage systems, it is probable that a greater number of U.S. hospitals have adopted some version of this approach. The ENA intends to gather information on the types of triage systems used in U.S. hospitals in their forthcoming ED survey.

##### Research on Triage Systems in the United States

Research on triage acuity systems is increasing, with studies primarily examining two important aspects of triage nurses’ acuity ratings: reliability and validity (Pedhazur & Schmelkin, 1991; Waltz, Strickland & Lenz, 1991). Reliability refers to the consistency or level of agreement among users of a rating system. In the context of emergency department (ED) triage, there are two relevant types of reliability. Interrater reliability assesses whether two different nurses would assign the same triage acuity level to the same patient, while intrarater reliability evaluates if the same nurse would give the same rating to the same patient at different times. Multiple studies in the United States have found that traditional three-level triage systems often have low interrater and intrarater reliability (Gill, Reese & Diamond, 1996; Travers, Waller, Bowling, Flowers & Tintinalli, 2002; Wuerz, Fernandes & Alarcon, 1998). For example, in one study, 305 triage assessments were analyzed after all triage nurses completed a required refresher course on the hospital’s three-level triage system (Travers et al., 2002). The initial ratings by the triage nurses were compared to retrospective ratings made by an expert panel of ED triage nurses, and the two groups agreed in only about half of the cases.

Validity refers to how accurately the rating system measures what it is supposed to measure. In the context of acuity ratings, validity indicates whether a label such as “nonurgent” truly reflects the absence of urgency in an emergency department patient’s condition. Assessing the validity of triage acuity has been challenging, and research studies have not reported on it.

In contrast to urine culture—which serves as the gold standard for accurately diagnosing urinary tract infections—there is no definitive gold standard for assessing the accuracy of triage acuity ratings in the conventional three-level triage system used in the United States. Nevertheless, surrogate indicators such as admission rates, resource use, and six-month mortality have been employed to evaluate five-level triage systems.

##### Triage Acuity Research on Five- Level Systems Abroad

Highly reliable and well-established five-level triage systems are now the standard in various countries. Table 2-2 outlines three of these systems.

The Australasian Triage Scale (ATS), created in Australia, has been implemented across Australia and New Zealand since the early 1990s (Australasian College for Emergency Medicine, 1994, 2002; Cameron, Bradt & Ashby, 1996). The Australian Council on Healthcare Standards uses the ATS as the foundation for emergency department (ED) evaluation and quality of care, with triage classifications regularly reviewed. Australian EDs are required to manage patients according to guidelines determined by their triage level. For instance, emergency cases must be attended to within 10 minutes, while nonurgent cases should be seen within 2 hours.

Several studies have assessed the validity and reliability of the ATS. Since there is no definitive gold standard for evaluating triage acuity, researchers have compared the five-level system to other illness severity scales and patient outcomes (Cameron et al., 1996; Cleary, Ashby, Jelinek & Lagaida, 1994; Erwich, Bond, Phillips, & Baggoley, 1997). Triage categories have shown strong correlations with disease- and population-specific measures, such as the Injury Severity Scales, trauma scores, and scales for cardiac, asthma, and pediatric patients. The ATS has also demonstrated a strong relationship with resource use and outcome indicators, including admission rates, emergency department length of stay, and mortality. Additionally, studies in which triage nurses assigned acuity levels to case scenarios have found that the ATS exhibits fair to moderate interrater reliability (Dilley & Standen, 1998; Jelinek & Little, 1996).

Five-level triage systems have been adopted in both the United Kingdom (U.K.) and Canada. In the U.K., the Manchester Triage Scale is utilized.

The system, developed in the U.K., uses a flow-chart presentation style (Manchester Triage Group, 1997). Nurses begin by determining the patient's main complaint, then select one of 52 flow charts to guide a structured interview and assign a triage category ranging from 1 (requiring immediate attention) to 5 (care needed within four hours). The Accident and Emergency Nurses Association has endorsed this system (Zimmermann, 2001). However, research on the Manchester system is limited. In one reliability study, triage assessments by nurses were retrospectively compared to those of senior medical staff, with only fair to moderate agreement found (Goodacre, Gillett, Harris & Houlihan, 1999).

The Canadian Triage and Acuity Scale (CTAS) was created by a team of Canadian emergency physicians (Beveridge & Ducharme, 1997; Canadian Association for Emergency Physicians [CAEP], 2002). Both the National Emergency Nurses' Affiliation, Inc. (NENA) and the Canadian Association for Emergency Physicians (CAEP) have recognized CTAS as the national benchmark for emergency department triage. Canadian hospitals are mandated to report data, including CTAS scores, for all emergency department visits to the Canadian government. Research has also demonstrated that the Canadian five-level scale provides strong interrater reliability when clinicians assess the severity of written scenarios based on real patient cases.

##### History of the Emergency Severity Index (ESI)

The Emergency Severity Index (ESI) is a five-level triage system created by emergency department physicians Richard Wuerz and David Eitel in the United States (Gilboy et al., 1999; Wuerz, Milne, Eitel, Travers & Gilboy, 2000). The founders believed that a key function of an emergency department triage tool is to help prioritize patients according to the urgency of their conditions. Triage nurses assess priority by asking, “Who should be seen first?” However, Drs. Wuerz and Eitel recognized that when multiple high-priority patients arrive at the same time, the question shifts to, “How long can each patient safely wait?” The ESI was designed based on a new approach to ED triage. Beyond determining which patient needs immediate attention, triage nurses using the ESI also evaluate what resources are required to move the patient toward an ED outcome. The ESI maintains the traditional focus on patient urgency, but also aims to achieve a second objective: not only sorting patients, but also directing them to the appropriate resources, ensuring the right patient receives the right care at the right time and place.

The initial version (v. 1) of the ESI was first used at two university-affiliated emergency departments in the spring of 1999. By fall 2000, the ESI was updated with input from emergency department clinicians to add triage criteria for pediatric patients, and this second version (v. 2) was then introduced in five more hospitals, including both non-university teaching and community hospitals. Feedback from nurses and physicians at these locations, combined with the best available scientific data, led to further improvements, resulting in version 3 (v. 3) in 2001 (Wuerz et al., 2001). More recently, additional updates have been made to the tool, which is presented in this edition of the ESI handbook as version 4 (v. 4) (Tanabe et al., in press).

Emergency physicians and nurses in the United States and Canada have carried out multiple research studies evaluating the reliability and validity of the ESI. The ESI has been directly compared with traditional three-level triage systems as well as the five-level CTAS. These studies will be discussed later in the chapter. Similar to the Australasian, Canadian, and U.K. systems, the ESI triage system consists of five levels. However, it differs in both its conceptual framework and practical use. The triage systems from Australia, Canada, and the U.K. are based on the idea that triage is meant to determine how long a patient can safely wait for care in the emergency department, with specific definitions for the time to physician assessment included in their protocols. This is a key distinction between ESI and both CTAS and ATS, as ESI does not specify expected time frames for physician evaluation.

The ESI stands out because it requires the triage nurse to predict the resources a patient will need—such as diagnostic tests and procedures—in addition to assessing acuity, in order to assign a triage category for patients who are less critically ill. Figure 2-1 presents the ESI triage levels. Later chapters will explain in detail how to use the ESI to categorize emergency department patients. In summary, the process begins with evaluating acuity by considering the stability of the patient’s vital signs and the risk of an immediate threat to life or organs. For patients who are stable, the nurse then estimates the resources likely needed to reach a disposition in the emergency department, based on their professional judgment. These resource requirements can vary from none to two or more.

##### Research on the Emergency Severity Index

In a preliminary study evaluating ESI v.1 ratings for 493 triage cases at two Boston hospitals in 1998, researchers determined that the system was both valid and reliable (Wuerz et al., 2000). During the study, patients were triaged at the same time by the triage nurse using the standard three-level scale and by a research nurse applying the first version of the ESI. Afterwards, an investigator, who was unaware of the research nurse’s ESI rating, assigned an ESI level based solely on the written triage note. The assigned triage levels showed a strong correlation with the resources utilized in the emergency department and with outcomes like hospital admission. Patients with higher acuity (ESI levels 1 and 2) required more resources and had a greater likelihood of being admitted compared to those with lower acuity (ESI levels 4 and 5). Agreement between the research nurse and the investigator was high, with 77 percent of cases matching exactly and 22 percent differing by only one triage level.

Several studies have assessed the reliability of the ESI by using the kappa statistic to determine inter-rater agreement, where kappa values range from 0 (no agreement) to 1 (perfect agreement). At one of the original ESI sites, a time series design was used to compare triage reliability with a three-level scale before and after implementing ESI v.1, as reported by Travers et al. (2002). The reliability improved from a weighted kappa of 0.53 with the three-level system to 0.68 with the five-level ESI. Another study evaluated the reliability and validity of ESI v.2 during and after its introduction at seven hospitals in the northeast and southeast. Over 200 triage nurses participated in an ESI triage education program, where they rated 40 case studies using the ESI (Eitel et al., 2003). The findings showed substantial inter-rater reliability, with kappa values between 0.70 and 0.80. Additionally, 386 real patient triage decisions were analyzed, revealing high inter-rater reliability with weighted kappas from 0.69 to 0.87. In a separate study conducted in a Midwestern urban emergency department, researchers assessed the reliability of ESI v.3 for 403 actual patient triages and found a kappa of 0.89 (Tanabe, Gimbel, Yarnold, Kyriacou & Adams, 2004).

Researchers from Canada and the United States have directly compared the inter-rater reliability of the ESI and CTAS in a randomized study (Worster et al., 2004). The study involved ten Canadian triage nurses who were experienced with CTAS. These nurses were randomly assigned to receive either ESI version 3 or CTAS refresher training, after which they evaluated 200 case studies using the respective triage system. Both groups demonstrated excellent inter-rater reliability, with kappa values of 0.89 for ESI and 0.91 for CTAS.

The effectiveness of the ESI has been assessed by analyzing outcomes in several thousand patients. Research has demonstrated consistent and strong associations between the ESI and factors such as hospitalization, emergency department length of stay, and mortality (Eitel et al., 2003; Tanabe et al., 2004; Wuerz, 2001; Wuerz et al., 2001). Additionally, the ESI has shown moderate correlations with physician evaluation and management codes, as well as nursing workload indicators (Travers et al., 2002). The ESI also enables meaningful comparisons of patient case mix across different hospitals. In one study, a stratified random sample of 200 patients was taken from each of the seven original ESI hospitals to compare case mix (Eitel et al., 2003). As anticipated, tertiary care centers had a greater proportion of high-acuity patients, while community hospitals had more patients requiring fewer resources.

A survey conducted among nursing staff at the two initial university teaching hospitals found that the response to the ESI implementation was favorable (Wuerz et al., 2001). Nurses indicated that the ESI was simpler to use and more effective for prioritizing patients for care compared to the previous three-level systems used at those locations.

In the latest ESI study, the accuracy of ESI level 2 was closely analyzed (Tanabe et al., in press). Reviewing the outcomes of 571 patients assigned to ESI level 2 across five hospitals, researchers discovered that 20 percent required immediate, life-saving treatment. The study’s authors suggested that these patients should be categorized as ESI level 1. The revised ESI version 4, discussed in subsequent chapters of this book, incorporates changes informed by this recent research.

##### Benefits of the Emergency Severity Index

The ESI has so far been adopted by hospitals across various regions of the country, including both university and community hospitals, as well as teaching and nonteaching facilities. Clinicians, managers, and researchers in these emergency departments have recognized several advantages of ESI triage compared to traditional three-level systems. One key advantage is the ability to quickly identify patients who require immediate care. ESI triage emphasizes the swift categorization of patients, especially when resources are limited. In some ways, ESI triage returns to the original intent of triage as established during Napoleon’s era. It involves rapidly sorting patients into five categories that reflect significant differences in anticipated resource needs and, consequently, operational requirements. Utilizing ESI for this quick categorization can enhance the movement of patients through the emergency department. After an ESI triage level is determined, patients can be directed to further assessment, registration, initial treatment, or the waiting area, depending on their severity and expected resource use. For instance, patients classified as level 1 or 2 can be taken straight to the treatment area for prompt evaluation and care, while those at levels 4 and 5 can proceed to registration and then wait for an available bed.

A key concern separate from ESI triage is when to perform a full nursing assessment. Many experts suggest that a comprehensive assessment does not need to take place at the initial triage station, but can instead be completed in the main treatment area or a secondary triage area, depending on each patient’s needs and the current workload in the emergency department (Gilboy et al., 1999). At triage, only the evaluation necessary to assign an ESI level is required to help with the initial sorting of patients. Full clinical assessments are time-consuming, and performing them at triage can delay care and lower satisfaction for patients with less severe conditions. As patient numbers and case complexity rise, leading to ED crowding, it is necessary to rethink traditional care processes to improve efficiency and effectiveness. Nevertheless, it remains essential to gather enough information to accurately determine the appropriate triage category. This is particularly important when patients face long waits to see a physician, which is common with higher patient volumes. Triage has become even more vital as waiting room times increase. Assigning a patient to an inappropriately low triage category can heighten the risk of poor outcomes due to the resulting longer wait.

Additional advantages of the ESI include its ability to identify patients who do not require care in the main emergency department and can instead be safely and more efficiently managed in a fast-track or urgent care setting. For instance, in many hospitals, triage guidelines specify that all ESI level 4 and 5 patients may be directed to either medical urgent care or minor trauma sections of the ED. The policy also permits certain level-3 patients, such as those needing straightforward migraine treatment, to be sent to urgent care (UC). ESI level-3 patients assigned to UC, as well as any patients transferred from UC to the acute area for more serious issues, are tracked through the quality improvement program. Nurses using the ESI have noted that it improves communication about patient acuity compared to the previous three-level triage systems used at these facilities (Wuerz et al., 2001). For example, a triage nurse can simply state, “I need a bed for a level 2 patient,” and the charge nurse immediately understands the urgency without needing a detailed patient description.

The ESI has also served as the basis for emergency department policies targeting certain groups. For instance, at one location, the psychiatric team is required to provide consultations for level 2 and 3 patients within 30 minutes, and for level 4 and 5 patients within an hour of being notified. At a different site, the ESI is part of a policy for patients over 20 weeks pregnant who come to the ED. Patients assigned ESI levels 1 and 2 receive care in the ED by emergency medicine staff with an obstetric consult, while those at levels 3, 4, or 5 are directed to the hospital’s labor and delivery unit.

The ESI is also an effective method for establishing thresholds for redirecting ambulance patients away from the ED. At Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston, the ED Diversion Policy and Guidelines define full capacity as all RN-staffed ED beds being occupied. The ESI is utilized to assess when the department is over capacity.

Studies have demonstrated that the ESI is a dependable and accurate method for assessing triage acuity. This system has been implemented in numerous emergency departments across various regions of the United States, including both academic and community hospitals. These institutions have shown that using the ESI enhances emergency department operations and patient care. Broader use of the ESI in U.S. hospitals could help create a standardized approach to triage acuity assessment, supporting benchmarking, public health monitoring, and research efforts.

### Chapter 3. Introduction to the Emergency Severity Index

The Emergency Severity Index (ESI) is an easy-to-use, five-level triage tool that classifies emergency department patients by assessing both the severity of their condition and the resources they will require. The triage nurse first evaluates the patient’s acuity. If the patient does not qualify for the highest acuity levels (ESI level 1 or 2), the nurse then considers the anticipated resource needs to assign a triage level (ESI level 3, 4, or 5). Unlike other triage systems, the ESI uniquely incorporates resource requirements into its assessment. Acuity is judged based on the stability of vital signs and the risk to life, limb, or organ function. The nurse predicts resource needs by drawing on experience with patients who have similar symptoms or injuries. Resource needs refer to the number of interventions or services a patient is likely to need before a decision about their care can be made. Once familiar with the ESI algorithm, the triage nurse can quickly and accurately assign patients to one of five clearly defined, non-overlapping categories. The ESI offers emergency departments a reliable and valid method for triage (Eitel, Travers, Rosenau, Gilboy & Wuerz, 2003; Travers, Waller, Bowling, Flowers & Tintinalli, 2002; Wuerz, Travers, Gilboy, Eitel, Rosenau & Yazhari, 2001; Tanabe, Gimbel, Yarnold, Kyriacou, & Adams, 2004; Tanabe, Gimbel, Yarnold, & Adams, 2004).

This chapter offers a detailed, step-by-step guide to triaging using the ESI algorithm. Later chapters delve deeper into essential concepts and include many examples to illustrate the nuances of applying ESI.

Algorithms are commonly applied in emergency care settings. Many emergency clinicians are well-acquainted with the algorithms taught in programs like Basic Life Support, Advanced Cardiac Life Support, and the Trauma Nursing Core Course. These programs offer a systematic, stepwise method for clinical decision making that clinicians can master through repeated practice. At each stage of the algorithm, users are guided on which questions to pose or what information to collect. Depending on the responses or data gathered, a decision is reached, and the algorithm leads the user to the subsequent step, eventually resulting in an outcome.

Using the ESI algorithm for triage requires an experienced emergency department nurse to begin at the top of the algorithm. Figure 3-1 provides a conceptual summary of the ESI algorithm, highlighting its key decision points. A more detailed explanation of the actual ESI algorithm is given later in the chapter (see Figure 3-1a). The algorithm involves four decision points (A, B, C, and D) to categorize patients into one of five triage levels (refer to Figure 3-1). With experience, the triage nurse will be able to quickly progress through each ESI decision point.

##### Decision Point A: Is the Patient Dying?

In simple terms, at decision point A (Figure 3-2), the triage nurse determines whether the patient is dying. If the response is “yes,” the triage process ends there, and the patient is immediately assigned to ESI level 1. If the answer is “no,” the process continues to the next step in the algorithm, decision point B.

This question helps assess if the patient is at risk of dying (conceptual algorithm): Does the patient need urgent life-saving treatment? The questions below assist in evaluating whether the patient fulfills level-1 criteria:

Does the patient need urgent airway management, medication, or another hemodynamic intervention?

Does the patient exhibit any of the following: is already intubated, not breathing, without a pulse, experiencing severe respiratory distress, has an SpO2 below 90 percent, shows sudden changes in mental status, or is unresponsive?

Studies have shown that triage nurses can reliably anticipate when immediate interventions are necessary (Tanabe et al., in press). For ESI triage, Table 3-1 outlines which interventions are classified as life-saving and which are not.

Interventions that are not classified as life-saving may include certain diagnostic or therapeutic procedures, but do not involve actions that would directly “save a life.” Life-saving interventions focus on ensuring an open airway, sustaining breathing, or supporting circulation. The following questions may assist in assessing whether a patient needs a life-saving intervention.

Is this patient's airway open and unobstructed?

Is the patient showing signs of breathing?

Is the patient exhibiting a pulse?

Is the nurse worried about the pulse’s rate, rhythm, and strength?

Was this patient intubated before arriving at the hospital due to worries about their capacity to keep their airway open, breathe on their own, or sustain adequate oxygen levels?

Is the nurse worried about whether this patient can supply enough oxygen to their tissues?

An ESI level-1 patient arrives at the emergency department in a critical, unstable state. Immediate intervention is essential to prevent death, prompting a rapid team response with the physician present at the bedside and nurses delivering intensive care. These patients receive immediate attention, as prompt treatment can influence their risk of complications or death.

A primary distinction between ESI level-1 and level-2 patients is the necessity for immediate physician involvement in patient care. Level-1 patients are in critical condition and need prompt evaluation and intervention by a physician. In contrast, although level-2 patients are also seriously ill, emergency nurses can begin treatment using established protocols without a physician present. The nurse understands that interventions are required but is assured that the patient’s condition is stable enough not to worsen rapidly. The nurse can start intravenous lines, provide supplemental oxygen, perform an ECG, and connect the patient to a cardiac monitor before a physician is required at the bedside.

When assessing the necessity for urgent lifesaving measures, the triage nurse thoroughly examines the patient’s respiratory condition and oxygen saturation (SpO2) levels. Even if a patient is still breathing, severe respiratory distress or an SpO2 below 90 percent signals the need for prompt action to secure the airway and ensure adequate oxygenation. Such a patient will need the physician present to administer medications for rapid sequence intubation or to initiate other airway and breathing interventions.

Patients experiencing chest pain should also be assessed according to the same standards. While some individuals with chest pain are quite stable and may only need a diagnostic ECG, they do not fulfill level-1 criteria. In contrast, those who appear pale, sweaty, are in acute respiratory distress, or are hemodynamically unstable will need urgent, life-saving treatment and do qualify for level-1 criteria. Every patient with chest pain must be evaluated against the level-1 criteria to decide if immediate life-saving intervention is necessary.

When deciding if a patient needs immediate life-saving care, the triage nurse must evaluate the patient’s level of consciousness. The ESI algorithm utilizes the AVPU scale (alert, verbal, pain, unresponsive) as shown in Table 3-2. This step aims to identify patients experiencing a sudden change in consciousness. The nurse should look for deviations from the patient’s baseline, with particular concern for those who were previously alert but are now categorized as P (pain) or U (unresponsive). Unresponsiveness should be considered in the context of sudden neurological changes, and not in patients with pre-existing developmental delays, documented dementia, or aphasia. Any patient who is unresponsive—including those who are intoxicated and do not respond to painful stimuli—meets level-1 criteria and requires immediate assessment. For instance, a patient with a sudden decrease in mental status who cannot maintain their airway or is experiencing severe respiratory distress would need urgent intervention.

Users familiar with ESI version 3 (v. 3) will observe a significant modification in the criteria for ESI level 1. The primary distinction between ESI v. 3 and ESI version 4 (v. 4) is the recognition and reclassification of some of the most critically ill patients, who were previously categorized as ESI level 2. Now, patients who need immediate life-saving interventions are assigned to ESI level 1. For example, under the previous version, a patient experiencing severe respiratory distress who needed intubation but was still breathing would have been placed in ESI level 2. In the current version, this patient now qualifies for level 1. Additional examples of patients now considered ESI level 1 include those who are weak and dizzy with a heart rate of 30 or 200. While this adjustment may not impact a large number of patients, it ensures that the most critically ill are classified correctly. Before v. 4, triage nurses often faced two types of ESI level-2 patients: those needing immediate attention and those who could safely wait a short period (about 10 minutes) without worsening. This issue prompted a large, multi-center, prospective study to determine which ESI level-2 patients actually received immediate interventions (Tanabe et al., in press). The findings from that study led to the revision of the ESI system. This updated ESI handbook outlines these changes and introduces ESI v. 4.

An ESI level-1 patient does not necessarily arrive at the emergency department by ambulance. Individuals with drug overdoses or acute alcohol intoxication might be left at the entrance, while children could be brought in by car and carried inside. An experienced triage nurse can quickly recognize these critically ill patients. With a swift, visual assessment from a distance, the nurse identifies those in severe distress. These patients are promptly moved to the treatment area, where resuscitation begins immediately.

Patients classified as ESI level 1 make up about 1 to 3 percent of all emergency department cases (Eitel et al., 2003; Wuerz, Milne, Eitel, Travers & Gilboy, 2000; Wuerz et al., 2001). These patients require immediate resuscitation by either the emergency physician and nurse or the trauma or code team upon arrival. Research on ESI indicates that the majority of ESI level-1 patients are admitted to intensive care units, while some die in the emergency department (Eitel et al., 2003; Wuerz, 2001). A small number of ESI level-1 patients are discharged from the ED if their altered level of consciousness or vital functions are reversible, as seen in cases of hypoglycemia, seizures, alcohol intoxication, or anaphylaxis.

Illustrations of ESI level 1:

Heart stoppage.

Cessation of breathing.

Acute difficulty breathing.

Oxygen saturation below 90%.

Severely injured trauma patient arrives unresponsive.

Overdose presenting with a respiratory rate of 6.

Three general questions are utilized to assess if the patient satisfies level-2 criteria.

Is this considered a high-risk scenario?

2. Does the patient exhibit confusion, lethargy, or disorientation?

3. Is the patient experiencing significant pain or discomfort?

The triage nurse gathers relevant subjective and objective data to promptly address these questions. This section provides a concise overview of ESI level-2 criteria, with a more comprehensive discussion of patients qualifying for ESI level-2 to be covered in Chapter 4.

Severe breathing difficulty accompanied by agonal or gasping respirations.

Markedly slow or fast heart rate accompanied by evidence of inadequate tissue perfusion.

Low blood pressure accompanied by symptoms of inadequate tissue perfusion.

A trauma patient in need of urgent resuscitation with crystalloids and colloids.

Experiencing chest pain, appearing pale and sweaty, with a blood pressure of 70 by palpation.

Feeling faint and lightheaded, heart rate is 30.

Severe allergic response.

Infant exhibiting limpness.

Unconscious with a strong smell of alcohol.

Low blood sugar accompanied by altered mental state.

##### Decision Point B: Should the Patient Wait?

After the triage nurse establishes that the patient does not qualify for ESI level 1, they proceed to decision point B (refer to Figure 33). At this stage, the nurse must determine if the patient can safely wait to be evaluated. If waiting is not appropriate, the patient is assigned ESI level 2. If the patient is able to wait, the process continues to the following step in the algorithm.

###### Is This a High-risk Situation?

Drawing on a brief patient interview, general observations, and the intuition developed through experience, the triage nurse identifies patients at high risk. Often, factors such as the patient’s age and medical history play a role in this assessment. A high-risk patient is someone whose condition could quickly worsen or who shows symptoms indicating a need for urgent, time-sensitive care. This type of patient may face a significant threat to life or organ function. In most cases, a comprehensive physical exam or a complete set of vital signs is not necessary to recognize high risk. Sometimes, the patient’s description of their symptoms forms a clinical picture that an experienced triage nurse immediately recognizes as dangerous. For instance, a patient who says, “I never get headaches and after lifting something heavy, I now have the worst headache of my life,” would be triaged as ESI level 2, as these symptoms could indicate a subarachnoid hemorrhage.

If a patient is classified as ESI level 2, the triage nurse has judged that it is unsafe for them to wait in the waiting area for any period of time. Although ESI does not define exact time frames, patients at ESI level 2 are a high priority and should typically be placed and begin receiving treatment within 10 minutes of their arrival. It is crucial to note that even though the criteria for level 1 have broadened in version 4 of the algorithm, ESI level-2 patients are still regarded as very ill and at significant risk. Immediate care is required, and a suitable bed must be located right away. In most cases, instead of moving on to the next patient, the triage nurse recognizes the severity of the situation and promptly notifies the charge nurse or staff in the patient care area that there is an ESI level-2 patient.

Instances of situations considered high-risk:

Experiencing ongoing chest pain suggestive of coronary syndrome, but currently stable and not in need of urgent life-saving treatment.

A healthcare worker experiences a needlestick injury.

Shows symptoms of a stroke, but does not fulfill level-1 requirements.

Ectopic pregnancy has been ruled out; the patient is hemodynamically stable.

A patient undergoing chemotherapy, and thus immunocompromised, presenting with a fever.

A patient exhibiting suicidal or homicidal tendencies.

Chapter 4 provides further details about high-risk situations.

###### Is the Patient Confused, Lethargic, or Disoriented?

This is the second question to consider at decision point B. Once more, the focus is on determining if the patient is exhibiting a sudden change in consciousness. Patients who are normally confused do not qualify for level-2 criteria.

Confused: Shows unsuitable reactions to stimuli, with reduced attention span and impaired memory.

Lethargic: Sleepy, spends more time sleeping than normal, but reacts suitably when prompted.

Disoriented: The patient cannot accurately respond to questions regarding time, location, or identity.

Instances of patients who exhibit confusion, lethargy, or disorientation:

Recent development of confusion in an older patient.

A 3-month-old infant whose mother reports that the baby is sleeping constantly.

The teenager was discovered in a state of confusion and disorientation.

All of these examples suggest that the brain could be impaired either in its structure or its chemistry.

###### Is This Patient in Severe Pain or Distress?

At decision point B, the triage nurse’s third question is whether the patient is experiencing pain or distress. If the answer is “no,” the nurse proceeds to the next step in the process. If the answer is “yes,” the nurse must evaluate the severity of the pain or distress, using clinical observation and/or a self-reported pain score of 7 or above on a 0 to 10 scale. When a patient reports pain at 7/10 or higher, the nurse may assign an ESI level 2, but this is not mandatory. Pain is a frequent reason for emergency department visits, and not all patients with pain scores of 7/10 or more require an ESI level-2 designation. For instance, a patient with a sprained ankle and pain rated at 8/10 would typically be classified as ESI level 4. Assigning a level 2 rating based solely on pain is not necessary in such cases.

In certain patients, pain can be evaluated through clinical observation, such as noting distressed facial expressions, sweating, body positioning, and alterations in vital signs. The triage nurse looks for physical signs of acute pain that confirm the patient’s reported pain level. For instance, a patient with abdominal pain who is sweating, has a rapid heart rate, and increased blood pressure, or a patient experiencing severe flank pain, vomiting, pale skin, and a known history of renal colic, both exemplify cases that qualify for ESI level-2. More details about ESI level 2 and pain assessment can be found in Chapter 4.

Severe distress may be either physical or mental. Instances of distress include a victim of sexual assault, an aggressive patient, or a bipolar patient experiencing a manic episode.

ESI level-2 patients represent a relatively small but high-risk segment, making up 20 to 30 percent of emergency department visits (Travers et al., 2002; Wuerz et al., 2001; Tanabe, Gimbel et al., 2004). After identifying an ESI level-2 patient, the triage nurse must ensure prompt care. Registration can be handled by a family member or completed at the bedside. These patients require vital signs and a thorough nursing assessment, though this does not have to occur during triage. Patient placement should not be postponed to complete vital sign collection. Studies on ESI indicate that 50 to 60 percent of ESI level-2 patients are admitted from the emergency department (Wuerz et al., 2001).

##### Decision Point C: Resource Needs

If the answers to the first two decision points are “no,” the triage nurse proceeds to decision point C (refer to Figure 3-4). At this stage, the nurse should ask, “How many different resources will this patient likely require for the physician to make a disposition decision?” The possible dispositions include discharging the patient home, admitting them to the observation unit or hospital, or transferring them to another facility. This step again relies on the triage nurse’s previous experience with similar emergency department cases. It is important for ED nurses to recognize that estimating resource needs is based on standards of care and is not influenced by the hospital’s type (teaching or non-teaching) or its location. Any patient presenting to an emergency department should generally require the same resources to reach a disposition. Taking into account the patient’s brief subjective and objective evaluation, medical history, allergies, medications, age, and gender, the nurse must determine how many different resources will be needed for the physician to decide on a disposition. Essentially, what is the usual protocol for a patient presenting with this common complaint in the ED? The triage nurse should make this judgment based on their assessment of the patient, focusing on standard practices in the specific emergency department rather than individual provider preferences.

To determine what resources are needed, the triage nurse should understand the standards of care in the emergency department. The nurse must also be aware of the idea of “prudent and customary.” An effective way to approach this is to consider, “Based on this patient’s main complaint or injury, what resources will the emergency physician probably use?” Resources may include hospital services, diagnostic tests, procedures, consultations, or interventions that go beyond the physician’s history and physical exam, as well as basic emergency department actions like applying a bandage. Additional details and examples can be found in Chapter 5.

Table 3-3 outlines what qualifies and does not qualify as a resource for ESI triage classification. Patients at ESI level 3 are expected to need two or more resources, those at ESI level 4 are anticipated to need one resource, and ESI level 5 patients are expected to require no resources, as shown in Table 3-4.

Studies indicate that ESI level-3 patients account for 30% to 40% of those treated in the emergency department (Eitel et al., 2003; Wuerz et al., 2001). These individuals typically need more comprehensive assessments but are considered stable in the short term, which can result in longer ED stays. ESI level 4 and 5 patients represent 20% to 35% of emergency department visits, and this percentage may be higher in areas with limited access to primary care. With proper training and a suitable skill set, mid-level providers could manage these patients in a fast-track or express care environment, especially since many present with trauma-related issues. Given their stable condition, it is safe for these patients to wait several hours before being seen.

##### Decision Point D:The Patient's Vital Signs

Prior to assigning a patient to ESI level 3, the nurse must review the patient’s vital signs to determine if they fall outside the normal range for the patient’s age and if these abnormalities are clinically significant. If the vital signs are abnormal, the triage nurse should consider elevating the triage level to ESI level 2. Ultimately, it is up to the triage nurse to decide whether the patient should be upgraded to ESI level 2 due to abnormal vital signs. This is referred to as decision point D.

Vital sign parameters vary by age (refer to Figure 3-5). The vital signs considered include pulse, respiratory rate, and oxygen saturation, with body temperature also assessed in children under three years old. Based on these criteria, a triage nurse may decide to upgrade an adult patient with a heart rate of 104, or keep them at ESI level 3. Similarly, a 6-month-old infant with a cold and a respiratory rate of 48 might be assigned to ESI level 2 or 3. The nurse must determine, using the patient’s history and physical exam, whether the vital signs indicate a high enough risk that the patient should not wait to be evaluated. Chapter 6 provides a detailed discussion of vital signs and includes examples.

Temperature is considered only for children younger than three years old. A high fever can disqualify young children from being placed in categories 4 and 5. This approach helps to recognize children who may have bacteremia and prevents them from being directed to a fast track area or experiencing long wait times. Detailed pediatric fever guidelines will be provided in Chapter 6.

###### Does Time to Treatment Influence ESI Triage Categories?

Estimating how long a patient can wait before being seen by a doctor is a key part of most triage systems. The Australasian and Canadian Triage Systems specify that patients must be evaluated by a physician within a set timeframe according to their triage level. In contrast, the ESI does not set strict time requirements for physician assessment. Nonetheless, patients classified as ESI level 2 should receive prompt attention, though the exact timing is determined by each institution’s policy. There is often confusion between institutional policies, the actual process of patient care, and the ESI triage level.

We will present four patient cases where there may appear to be a contradiction between patient flow and triage category. Trauma patients often arrive at triage after experiencing a significant injury mechanism, such as being an unrestrained passenger in a high-speed car accident. Sometimes, these patients do not arrive by ambulance but instead come to triage on their own, reporting localized right upper quadrant pain and having stable vital signs. Although this patient is physiologically stable, walked into the emergency department, and does not meet the criteria for ESI level 1, they are still at high risk for injuries like a liver laceration and other serious trauma, so they should be assigned ESI level 2. Many emergency departments have trauma protocols and trauma response levels that require prompt initiation of care. Both triage level and trauma response level are important and should be documented as separate scores. While the triage nurse correctly identifies this as a physiologically stable trauma patient and assigns ESI level 2, she should also ensure the patient is placed and managed according to trauma policy. The patient is likely stable for at least another 10 minutes and does not need immediate life-saving measures. However, if the same patient arrived with a palpable blood pressure of 80, they would be categorized as ESI level 1 and would need urgent, life-saving hemodynamic interventions.

Another instance of policies influencing triage levels involves patients presenting with stable chest pain. If a patient is physiologically stable but has chest pain that could indicate an acute coronary syndrome, they qualify for ESI level-2. These patients do not need immediate life-saving measures but are considered high-risk and require prompt attention. An ECG should be completed within 10 minutes of arrival, and many emergency departments have protocols to ensure rapid ECG initiation. Although care for these patients should begin quickly, the ECG itself is a diagnostic tool, not a life-saving intervention. If all patients with chest pain were assigned ESI level-1, it would make it challenging to prioritize those who truly need immediate life-saving care. However, a chest pain patient who arrives at triage sweating and with a palpable blood pressure of 80 would meet ESI level-1 criteria.

A third instance of time-critical care involves patients showing symptoms of an acute stroke. If the patient is physiologically stable, a delay of 10 minutes before starting treatment is unlikely to worsen their condition. On the other hand, a stroke patient who cannot maintain their airway qualifies for ESI level 1.

In another scenario, an elderly patient who has fallen and may have a hip fracture arrives with family by private car and is experiencing significant pain. Although the patient does not strictly qualify for ESI level 2, they are clearly uncomfortable. The triage nurse would assign an ESI level 3 and likely prioritize placing the patient in a bed ahead of other ESI level 3 patients. Similar situations can occur with patients arriving by ambulance. However, arriving by ambulance alone does not justify assigning ESI level 1 or 2. Triage level should always be determined using ESI criteria, regardless of how the patient arrived.

Overall, care for ESI level-2 patients should be expedited, with the goal of placing them in the treatment area within 10 minutes. It is crucial to note that although ESI version 4 has broadened level-1 criteria to include patients needing immediate interventions who were previously classified as level 2, all level-2 patients remain potentially very ill and need prompt assessment and care. The triage nurse has determined that it is unsafe for these patients to wait. While they may appear stable at present, their condition could quickly worsen, and timely diagnostic or therapeutic interventions may be critical (for example, stable chest pain requires an ECG within 10 minutes of arrival), or they may face a possible major threat to life or organ function. ESI level-2 patients are still regarded as being at very high risk.

Given the current issue of ED overcrowding, it is common for triage nurses to encounter multiple ESI level-2 patients when there are no available ED beds. In these circumstances, there may be a temptation to “undertriage,” which can result in significant harm to patients and inaccurately reflect the ED’s patient population. When several ESI level-2 patients arrive at the same time, the triage nurse should assess each one using the ESI algorithm. This allows the nurse to prioritize among the level-2 patients, identifying those at greatest risk to guide decisions about patient placement.

##### Summary

In conclusion, the ESI is a straightforward five-level triage system that categorizes patients according to the severity of their condition and the resources they require. The ESI triage process relies on four main decision points. With this system, an experienced emergency department nurse can quickly and accurately assess and triage patients.

### Chapter 4. ESI Level 2

This chapter builds upon the initial overview of the ESI, emphasizing the importance of the experienced ED nurse’s clinical judgment. The ESI triage training program should allocate significant time to clarifying which patients qualify for ESI level 2. Here, we focus on typical patient scenarios that fulfill the criteria for ESI level 2.

Once the triage nurse has established that the patient does not need urgent life-saving care, the next step is to assess whether the patient can wait. In making this judgment, the triage nurse should ask, “Would I allocate my last available bed to this patient?” The three questions outlined in Figure 4-1 must be addressed, as they are essential elements of the ESI level-2 criteria.

Is this considered a high-risk scenario?

Is the patient showing signs of newly developed confusion, drowsiness, or disorientation?

3. Is the patient in significant pain or discomfort?

The rest of this chapter explores the decision-making aspects of ESI level 2 in depth. Numerous examples are included, illustrating potential medical diagnoses linked to patients’ chief complaints and symptoms. An experienced triage nurse will always evaluate the patient’s chief complaint, observed signs and symptoms, demographic information, and medical history to help identify high-risk situations. Although the goal of nurse triage is not to establish a medical diagnosis, these scenarios rely on the triage nurse’s expertise regarding possible diagnoses related to specific complaints. Comprehensive resources on the signs and symptoms of various medical conditions include the Emergency Nursing Core Curriculum[©] and other emergency nursing reference books. The following section highlights selected examples of high-risk situations, though it is not meant to be all-inclusive. These examples are summarized in Table 4-1.

##### High-risk Situations

Recognizing high-risk situations is essential in the triage decision-making process, no matter which triage system is applied. The ESI emphasizes the significance of identifying high-risk cases and relies on the triage nurse’s knowledge and experience to determine which patients are at increased risk.

There is limited literature on how emergency department triage nurses make decisions. While knowledge and experience are essential, they are not enough on their own. Another crucial element is intuition or a “sixth sense.” New triage nurses should be taught practical guidelines to follow until they gain the confidence and experience needed to make quick, accurate judgments. Examples of such guidelines include “assume all women of childbearing age are pregnant until proven otherwise” or “consider all chest pain as cardiac in origin until proven otherwise.” Novice nurses are also instructed in recognizing symptom clusters, such as the cardiac cluster of chest pain, nausea, shortness of breath, and sweating. Through previous clinical experiences, ED nurses develop what are known as clinical portraits—memories of specific patient cases they have encountered. For instance, a nurse will always recall a patient with fever, stiff neck, and a meningococcal rash when seeing a similar case in triage. With each triage situation, nurses must rely on their accumulated knowledge and experience. Experienced triage nurses should be able to easily recognize high-risk cases.

Vital signs alone are often insufficient for identifying patients at high risk. Patients usually arrive at the emergency department with a main complaint, symptoms, or a history that points to a potentially serious issue that can quickly worsen if not addressed promptly. Factors such as the patient’s age, medical history, and current medications often affect how severe the chief complaint appears. For instance, an elderly, frail individual with intense abdominal pain faces a much greater risk of complications and death compared to a healthy 20-year-old. The older patient with abdominal pain should be assigned an ESI level 2, while the younger adult with stable vital signs is typically given an ESI level 3. Triage nurses frequently recognize high-risk cases, which may then be supported by abnormal vital signs. For example, a patient reporting fever and a productive cough might have a respiratory rate of 32 and an oxygen saturation of 90 percent. An experienced triage nurse can use their knowledge to determine that this patient likely has pneumonia, is at risk for further oxygen desaturation, and is therefore high risk. In contrast, less experienced emergency department nurses may lack the necessary skills to reliably identify high-risk situations and make correct triage decisions. As a result, an inexperienced triage nurse can be a liability, regardless of the triage system in place. They have not yet developed the ability to use symptom patterns, clinical scenarios, or intuition—essential tools for recognizing high-risk patients. The following section will outline specific examples of high-risk situations.

###### Abdominal and Gastrointestinal

Abdominal pain is a common reason for visits to the emergency department. What factors make it high risk? Taking a thorough history and evaluating the current pain level, respiratory rate, and heart rate are key components that help identify high-risk cases. Pain severity is just one aspect to consider. If severe abdominal pain is accompanied by tachycardia or respiratory distress, this may indicate shock and puts the patient at higher risk. Elderly patients with severe abdominal pain are also at increased risk, as they are more likely to suffer from bowel obstructions, gastrointestinal bleeding, and other abdominal issues that carry greater morbidity and mortality compared to younger individuals. It is crucial to look for signs and symptoms of an acute abdomen in all patients presenting with abdominal pain. Important questions include how long the pain has been present, what prompted the patient to seek emergency care today, and whether there has been severe nausea, vomiting, or diarrhea. Assessing for dehydration is also important. Patients who report severe, “ripping” abdominal pain that radiates to the back should be evaluated for a possible abdominal aortic aneurysm. This pain is typically described as severe, constant, and of sudden onset, and these patients may have a history of hypertension.

Patients presenting with abdominal pain are frequently assigned an ESI level 3 at the start of the triage assessment, but if tachycardia or additional risk factors are identified, the triage nurse may reassess and classify the patient as high risk.

Vomiting blood or presenting with blood per rectum requires careful assessment, especially in relation to vital signs. A 30-year-old with bright red rectal bleeding, stable vital signs, and no additional risk factors does not qualify for ESI level 2. However, an older adult who called emergency services due to vomiting blood and has a heart rate of 117 and a respiratory rate of 24 is considered high risk and does meet the criteria for ESI level 2.

###### Cardiovascular

Chest pain is a frequent reason for seeking medical care. The symptoms of acute coronary syndromes (ACS) can be vague, making it challenging to assess ACS risk during triage. Patients experiencing chest or epigastric discomfort, whether or not they have additional symptoms, generally require a prompt ECG to check for ACS and should be considered high risk—classified as ESI level 2. Triage nurses must be aware of how heart disease can present differently, especially in women. For instance, a 54-year-old obese woman arriving at the emergency department with epigastric pain and fatigue is at risk for ACS and should be assigned to ESI level 2 as high risk. Patients with chest pain who are unstable and need immediate interventions like intubation or hemodynamic support should be triaged as ESI level 1. Not all patients with chest pain fall into level 1 or 2 categories; for example, a healthy 20-year-old with chest pain, cough, and a fever of 101°F is at low risk for ACS and does not meet ESI level 1 or 2 criteria. Each case must be evaluated individually. Other high-risk cardiovascular conditions include possible hypertensive emergencies, acute arterial occlusions, and patients presenting with fever after valve replacement surgery.

###### Dental, Ear, Nose, and Throat

While less frequent, epiglottitis still occurs and poses a possible threat to the airway. Patients with peritonsillar abscesses also face potential airway compromise, and both conditions are considered high-risk. If a patient with either issue is at immediate risk of airway obstruction and needs urgent intervention, they meet level-1 criteria. For those presenting with epistaxis, the triage nurse should check blood pressure, even though this step is not included in the ESI algorithm. Causes of epistaxis may include a posterior nosebleed from a hypertensive crisis, nose picking in a patient taking Coumadin®, or recent cocaine use. Regardless of the cause, these patients should be assigned ESI level 2, as they are considered high-risk.

###### Environmental

Individuals with inhalation injuries are at elevated risk for possible airway obstruction. If a patient exhibits marked airway distress necessitating urgent intervention, they fulfill level-1 criteria.

###### Facial

Individuals who have sustained facial trauma need to be assessed for potential facial fractures. Such fractures frequently occur alongside other serious injuries and can result in airway obstruction, making it essential to classify these cases as high risk. If facial trauma leads to actual airway compromise, the patient should be assigned an ESI level 1 to ensure prompt airway intervention. Cases with a significant risk of airway compromise should be triaged as ESI level 2.

###### General Medical

A number of other general medical issues should be evaluated for potential high-risk scenarios. These complications include diabetic ketoacidosis, abnormal blood sugar levels (either high or low), sepsis, episodes of fainting or near-fainting, and various electrolyte imbalances that may require urgent intervention. Hyperkalemia, in particular, poses a significant risk as it can cause dangerous heart rhythm disturbances. This condition should be considered in dialysis patients who present with weakness. Additionally, cancer patients receiving chemotherapy who develop a fever are at increased risk for sepsis and must be recognized as high-risk and assessed promptly.

###### Genitourinary

Men experiencing testicular torsion typically report intense pain, are readily identifiable, and need prompt assessment, surgical treatment, and immediate pain management. Patients on renal dialysis who cannot finish their treatment also represent a high-risk genitourinary emergency due to the potential for multiple electrolyte imbalances. Both women and, more frequently, men may arrive at triage with sudden urinary retention. Men over 65 often present with benign prostatic hypertrophy leading to an inability to urinate. Both men and women may also be unable to void after surgery. These individuals are in significant distress and require urgent urinary catheterization. Such cases involve patients in severe distress and should be assigned an ESI level 2.

###### Mental Health

Patients presenting with mental health issues are considered high risk if they pose a threat to themselves, others, or their surroundings. Individuals who are suicidal, homicidal, psychotic, violent, or at risk of fleeing should be classified as high risk. Intoxication alone, without evidence of trauma or risk of aspiration, does not qualify as high risk. However, intoxicated patients should be thoroughly evaluated for any signs of trauma or behavioral problems linked to alcohol use or their medical history. If such factors are present, the situation may be high risk, and the patient should be assigned an ESI level 2.

###### Neurological

Patients experiencing severe headaches along with changes in mental status, elevated blood pressure, lethargy, fever, or a rash should be regarded as high risk. Additionally, any individual who suddenly develops speech difficulties or motor weakness should be categorized as ESI level 2. These symptoms may indicate an acute stroke, making prompt assessment essential. The time elapsed since symptom onset is a key consideration in selecting treatment options, especially for fibrinolytic or other interventions. If a patient with no prior history of headaches arrives at the emergency department with a sudden headache, they should be considered at high risk for a subarachnoid hemorrhage. Such patients often recall the exact activity they were engaged in when the headache started, commonly after lifting, straining during a bowel movement, or following sexual activity.

###### Obstetrical and Gynecological

Women presenting with abdominal pain or vaginal bleeding should be thoroughly evaluated, and vital signs should be recorded unless there is an immediate life-threatening condition. For all women of reproductive age, it is essential to obtain a pregnancy history and determine the date of the last menstrual period. The triage nurse should look for symptoms of abruptio placentae and placenta previa in women who are in late pregnancy. In early pregnancy, assessment should focus on identifying signs of ectopic pregnancy and spontaneous abortion. Pregnant patients who are between 14 and 20 weeks gestation or further along should be promptly evaluated by a physician, following the specific guidelines of the institution. Postpartum women who report heavy vaginal bleeding should also receive urgent medical attention from a physician. Any woman, whether pregnant or postpartum, who exhibits significant hemodynamic instability and requires immediate life-saving measures should be classified as ESI level 1 during triage.

###### Ocular

Individuals who experience eye trauma, sudden partial or complete vision loss, or chemical exposure to the eye are at significant risk for lasting eye damage and should be assigned an ESI level 2 triage. Visual loss can be caused by conditions such as central retinal artery occlusion, acute narrow-angle glaucoma, and retinal detachment. Eye injuries may lead to globe rupture or hyphema. Chemical exposures, especially from alkali substances, require prompt irrigation to minimize corneal injury. Each of these situations demands urgent assessment and intervention to avoid further harm or worsening of the condition. These cases fulfill the requirements for ESI level 2. Although immediate eye irrigation is crucial, it is not classified as a life-saving measure, so these patients do not qualify for ESI level 1.

###### Orthopedic

Patients exhibiting signs and symptoms of compartment syndrome face a significant risk of losing the affected limb and should be categorized as ESI level 2. Other orthopedic injuries considered high-risk include any limb injury with impaired neurovascular status, partial or complete amputations, or injuries resulting from mechanisms known to be high-risk, such as severe acceleration or deceleration. Individuals with suspected fractures of the pelvis, femur, or hip, as well as other limb dislocations, require thorough assessment and monitoring of vital signs. These types of fractures may lead to substantial blood loss. If a patient is hemodynamically unstable and requires immediate life-saving intervention, they should be classified as ESI level 1.

###### Pediatrics

Triage nurses often feel uneasy when determining the acuity level for pediatric patients, particularly infants. Gathering a precise history from the caregiver and assessing the child’s activity are crucial steps. A child who cannot be comforted or who appears withdrawn may be at significant risk for severe illness. The conditions listed below illustrate high-risk scenarios in children:

Convulsions.

Severe dehydration and sepsis.

A complication of diabetes known as diabetic ketoacidosis.

Abuse of children, burn injuries.

Injury to the head.

Overdoses or ingestion of vitamins, iron, or other substances.

An infant younger than 28 days old who has a temperature of 100.4° F (38° C) or higher.

###### Transplant

Patients who have undergone organ transplantation are typically unwell and classified as high risk. They may develop organ rejection, sepsis, or other complications. Individuals awaiting transplantation and on the transplant list are also generally regarded as high risk.

###### Respiratory

Numerous respiratory issues can put patients at significant risk. Those experiencing mild to moderate distress should undergo further assessment of their respiratory rate and pulse oximetry to decide if they should be classified as ESI level 2. Patients exhibiting severe respiratory distress who need immediate lifesaving measures, such as intubation, qualify for level-1 categorization. A high-risk patient is someone who is currently breathing and oxygenating sufficiently but is in respiratory distress and at risk of rapid decline. Causes of respiratory distress may include asthma, pulmonary embolism, pleural effusion, pneumothorax, foreign body aspiration, inhalation of toxic smoke, or shortness of breath accompanied by chest pain.

###### Toxicological

The majority of patients presenting with an overdose require prompt assessment, as these cases are considered high risk. Identifying the specific substances ingested and their amounts is frequently challenging. If the overdose was intentional and the patient expresses suicidal thoughts, this also qualifies as a high-risk scenario. Patients who arrive without breathing or need urgent lifesaving measures should be assigned ESI level 1, while all other admitted overdose cases should be classified as ESI level 2.

###### Trauma

Patients who have experienced a traumatic event are often at significant risk for injury, even if no visible injuries are present. Any injury mechanism that carries a high risk should be classified as ESI level 2, unless the patient has unstable vital signs and needs immediate intervention, in which case they should be assigned ESI level 1. Serious injuries occur due to the transfer of mechanical or kinetic energy, typically from acceleration, deceleration, or both. Examples include motor vehicle and motorcycle accidents, falls, and gunshot or stab wounds, all of which involve blunt or penetrating trauma and require thorough assessment for possible severe injury. The triage nurse should gather information such as the patient’s age, any pre-existing medical conditions, environmental factors, the height of a fall or jump, the speed of the vehicle involved, any history of loss of consciousness, the site of a penetrating injury, and the type of weapon used. The nurse will use their understanding of biomechanics and injury mechanisms to evaluate the patient and determine if they meet ESI level 2 criteria. Gunshot wounds to the head, neck, chest, or groin generally necessitate trauma team involvement and immediate care, and should be triaged as ESI level 1.

###### Wound Management

What factors classify a wound as high risk? Is there ongoing, uncontrolled bleeding? Is there evidence of arterial bleeding? Does the injury involve a partial amputation? Consider how the wound occurred and whether the mechanism of injury puts the patient at increased risk for additional traumatic complications. The majority of wounds do not qualify for ESI level 2. For example, a patient with a stab wound to the thigh that only affects the subcutaneous tissue, has bleeding under control, and maintains good distal neurological function can be assigned to ESI level 4. However, any wound with uncontrolled bleeding that demands immediate, lifesaving intervention to stabilize the patient falls under level 1 criteria.

##### Confusion/Lethargy/ Disorientation

The second consideration when assessing if a patient qualifies for level-2 criteria is whether they are experiencing new confusion, lethargy, or disorientation. Changes in mental status are also a common primary complaint. These patients may arrive at the emergency department accompanied by relatives, friends, or paramedics. At decision point B in the ESI algorithm, confusion, lethargy, or disorientation refers specifically to a recent or sudden change in the patient’s level of consciousness. Ongoing dementia or chronic confusion does not satisfy the requirements for ESI level 2. Acute confusion, lethargy, or disorientation can result from numerous serious medical issues, such as stroke, transient ischemic attack, other structural brain abnormalities, metabolic or electrolyte disturbances like hypoglycemia or hyponatremia, and toxicological problems.

This part of the algorithm is typically straightforward and offers minimal room for misinterpretation. When a patient arrives at triage with an unknown medical history and is confused, lethargic, or disoriented, the triage nurse should presume these symptoms are new and assign the patient to ESI level 2. However, if the patient exhibits new confusion, lethargy, or disorientation and needs an immediate life-saving intervention as outlined earlier, they should be categorized as ESI level 1.

##### Severe Pain/Distress

The last consideration in deciding if the patient qualifies for level-2 is whether they are experiencing severe pain or distress. The patient must be evaluated for significant pain or distress. Any patient reporting a pain score of 7 out of 10 or higher should be evaluated for ESI level-2 criteria.

The word "considered" holds significant importance. It is ultimately the triage nurse’s judgment to decide if the combination of the patient’s clinical condition and reported pain level justifies assigning an ESI level 2. For instance, a patient whose toe was struck by a heavy metal object might report their pain as 10 out of 10. The patient could indeed have a fracture and be in intense pain, and may not have attempted any pain relief before arriving at the emergency department. In this scenario, the appropriate triage level would be ESI level 4, as only one resource—an x-ray—will be required. The triage nurse should provide comfort measures at triage, such as applying ice, elevating the foot, and administering pain medication if protocols allow, to help alleviate the pain. The nurse should accept the patient’s report of severe pain and address it during triage. Nevertheless, this patient can safely wait to be seen and should not be prioritized for the last available bed. In conclusion, the triage nurse evaluates not just the patient’s reported pain score, but also considers the main complaint, medical history, and the patient’s physical presentation when assigning a triage level. Patients for whom severe pain could justify an ESI level 2 rating include:

A patient experiencing severe (10/10) flank pain and visibly writhing during triage.

An 80-year-old woman experiencing generalized abdominal pain rated 7 out of 10, accompanied by intense nausea.

A 30-year-old individual experiencing an acute pain crisis due to sickle cell disease.

A cancer patient experiencing intense pain.

Any burn, whether full-thickness or partial-thickness, that necessitates prompt pain management.

All emergency department patients should be evaluated for pain and asked to rate their pain using a tool like the visual analog scale. Many triage nurses feel uneasy about recording a patient’s pain score and then having the patient wait to be seen. It is crucial for triage nurses to recognize that a patient’s self-reported pain score is just one aspect of the overall pain assessment. For instance, triage nurses often encounter patients who appear comfortable—such as laughing, talking on the phone, or eating—yet claim their pain is 10 or higher. Triage nurses should assign an ESI level 2 if a patient reports a pain score of 7 out of 10 or more and the nurse’s subjective and objective evaluation indicates that the pain requires interventions beyond what can be provided at triage. In such cases, the triage nurse determines that it would not be appropriate for the patient to wait and assigns them to the last available bed.

Ultimately, when deciding if a patient qualifies for ESI level-2, the triage nurse needs to evaluate for severe distress, which can be either physiological or psychological. Beyond pain, patients with significant respiratory distress fulfill the physiological criteria for ESI level 2. Severe psychological distress may be seen in patients who are:

Overwhelmed with distress following a sexual assault.

Displaying disruptive behavior during triage.

Aggressive.

Individuals who have experienced domestic abuse.

Undergoing an intense response to grief.

These patients are typically prioritized by the triage nurse to be taken directly to the treatment area, allowing them to bypass the waiting room.

##### Summary

We have examined the essential elements and questions required to assess if a patient qualifies for ESI level-2. It is vital for the triage nurse to take these questions into account when evaluating every patient. Overlooking a high-risk scenario could lead to longer wait times and possibly adverse outcomes for the patient.

### Chapter 5. Expected Resource Needs

Historically, triage systems have relied exclusively on assessing the severity of a patient’s condition. In these systems, nurses determine an acuity level by judging how long a patient can safely wait before being evaluated by a healthcare provider. The Emergency Severity Index (ESI) introduces a different method by not only considering which patients require immediate attention, but also, for those with less severe conditions, estimating the resources that will likely be needed to reach a patient’s disposition. This chapter provides background on the rationale for incorporating resource prediction into the ESI and explains what is considered a resource. It also presents examples of patients classified as ESI levels 3 to 5, along with the anticipated resources each will require.

Traditionally, comprehensive triage has served as the primary approach for assigning triage acuity in U.S. emergency departments (Emergency Nurses Association [ENA], 1997, pp. 3-10; Gilboy, Travers & Wuerz, 1999). These triage systems rely on the nurse’s evaluation of vital signs, both subjective and objective data, medical history, allergies, and current medications to establish the level of triage acuity.

Predicting resource needs is a key component of the ESI for patients categorized as ESI level 3, 4, or 5. It is essential to note that resource allocation is not considered for patients with high acuity, such as those at ESI level 1 or 2. Resource prediction sets the ESI apart from other triage systems that focus solely on acuity. When Drs. Wuerz and Eitel developed the ESI triage system, they incorporated resource utilization to provide additional information and enable more precise triage decisions. They believed that experienced emergency department (ED) triage nurses could anticipate the types and quantities of tests, treatments, and consultations a patient would require during their ED visit. This has been supported by recent studies on ESI implementation and validation, which have demonstrated that triage nurses can accurately predict the resource needs of ED patients (Eitel, Travers, Rosenau, Gilboy & Wuerz, 2003; Tanabe, Gimbel, Yarnold & Adams, 2004). One such study, conducted across seven EDs in diverse geographic locations, including both urban and rural settings as well as academic and community hospitals, found that nurses using the ESI correctly predicted the number of resources needed by ED patients 70 percent of the time. In other words, ESI classification by skilled triage nurses reliably forecasts at triage how many resources patients will need to reach ED disposition, and, more importantly, distinguishes between patients who will require low versus high resource intensity. This ability to differentiate based on resource needs enables more efficient patient flow at ED presentation by directing patients into appropriate operational pathways, facilitating parallel processing. Additionally, research has shown that ESI triage levels are associated with significant patient outcomes, such as admission and mortality rates (Eitel et al., 2003).

It is important to remember that resource prediction applies solely to patients who are less acutely ill. At decision points A and B in the ESI algorithm (Figure 5-1), the nurse determines if patients qualify for ESI levels 1 or 2 based exclusively on their acuity. In contrast, at decision point C, the nurse assigns ESI levels 3 through 5 by evaluating both the patient’s acuity and anticipated resource requirements. Therefore, the triage nurse takes resource needs into account only when the responses to decision points A and B are “no.”

To determine what resources an ED patient may require, the triage nurse should have a broad understanding of emergency department care standards and, more precisely, know what is considered reasonable and typical emergency care. A simple way to approach this is to consider, “Based on this patient’s main complaint, which resources are emergency providers most likely to use?”

The triage nurse relies on information gathered from a brief subjective and objective assessment, along with details such as past medical history, current medications, age, and gender, to estimate how many resources the ED provider will require to make a decision about the patient’s care. For instance, a healthy teenager with a straightforward leg laceration and no significant medical history would likely need just one resource: suturing. Conversely, an elderly patient with several chronic conditions and no prior episodes of dizziness who arrives with a head laceration after a fall will obviously require multiple resources, such as suturing, laboratory tests, an ECG, imaging studies, or specialist consultations. Proper application of the ESI triage system depends on the nurse’s ability to anticipate resource needs, making it most effective when performed by a seasoned emergency nurse. Overall, regardless of the triage method used, we maintain that triage should be conducted by an experienced emergency nurse to ensure patient safety.

Table 5-1 (also referenced as Table 3-1) outlines the criteria for classifying resources within the ESI triage system. The distinction between ESI levels 3, 4, and 5 is based on the nurse’s assessment of the number of resources a patient will require for disposition. According to the triage nurse’s judgment, patients anticipated to need no resources are assigned to level 5, those expected to need one resource are placed in level 4, and patients likely to require two or more resources are categorized as ESI level 3. Research has shown that patients needing two or more resources experience higher rates of hospital admission, increased mortality, and longer emergency department stays (Eitel et al., 2003; Tanabe et al., 2004 Reliability and validity).

While Table 5-1 does not include every possible resource, it offers general direction regarding the types of diagnostic tests, procedures, and treatments that are considered resources within the ESI system. Emergency nurses using ESI should avoid focusing too much on the specific definitions of each resource. The key point is that ESI only requires the triage nurse to estimate the resources a patient will likely need during their ED visit. Table 5-1 lists the most frequently used resources, but it is neither feasible nor necessary to list every potential ED resource. For accurate ESI assignment, it is sufficient to determine whether a patient will need no resources, one resource, or two or more resources. Once a triage nurse identifies two likely resources, further estimation is unnecessary. The main purpose of the ESI resource component is to distinguish patients with more complex, resource-intensive needs from those with simpler issues. For ESI triage, resources are defined as interventions that go beyond a basic exam or minor interventions by ED staff, or that require involvement from personnel outside the ED. Resources that demand significant ED staff time (such as administering IV medications or inserting a chest tube) or require outside staff or services (like radiology for x-rays or surgical consultations) tend to increase the patient’s ED stay and reflect a higher level of patient complexity and triage category.

There are frequently asked questions regarding what qualifies as an ESI resource. One common question concerns how many blood or urine tests and x-rays count as a resource. According to the ESI triage system, the triage nurse should consider the number of distinct types of resources required to decide the patient’s disposition, rather than counting each individual test.

A complete blood count (CBC) and an electrolyte panel together make up a single laboratory test resource.

A complete blood count and a chest x-ray are two types of resources (laboratory test and imaging).

A CBC and a urinalysis are both laboratory tests, and when performed together, they are considered a single resource.

A chest x-ray and standard skull radiographs are one type of resource (x-ray).

Cervical spine X-rays and a head CT scan are two diagnostic tools (an X-ray and a CT scan).

Another commonly debated resource is the use of a splint, which is not considered a resource. If it were, patients with ankle sprains would be classified as ESI level 3 (requiring an x-ray and splint). Although applying a splint can require significant effort, it’s important to remember that resource prediction is solely intended to categorize patients and ensure they are directed to the appropriate area of the emergency department. In many emergency departments, ESI level-3 patients are not suitable for fast track or urgent care sections. Triage scores do not reflect the overall intensity of nursing workload.

Another frequently asked question about ESI resources concerns the inclusion of eye irrigation as a resource. Patients who experience a chemical splash to the eye are typically classified as ESI level-2 due to the high-risk nature of their injury, so the need for eye irrigation does not influence their ESI level. On the other hand, if the eye issue is caused by dust particles, the patient is not automatically considered high risk. In such cases, eye irrigation is counted as a resource, placing the patient at ESI level-4. Performing an eye exam is not considered a resource since it is part of the standard physical examination. Additional questions about resources are discussed in the Frequently Asked Questions section of Chapter 5 in Appendix A.

Clinicians often ask about the items categorized as “not resources” in Table 5-1. This list is designed to help triage nurses efficiently and accurately assign patients to one of five clinically distinct levels (Wuerz, Milne, Eitel, Travers & Gilboy, 2000). Items considered not to be resources include physical examinations, point-of-care testing, and procedures that generally do not increase a patient’s length of stay in the emergency department or suggest greater complexity. Because it is standard practice for all ED patients to receive a basic history and physical exam, these assessments—including pelvic exams—are not counted as resources for ESI classification. The strength of the ESI lies in its straightforwardness; the main aim of identifying resources is to distinguish patients with more complex needs who require two or more resources (level 3 or higher) from those with less complicated issues who will likely need fewer than two resources (level 4 or 5). Emergency nurses should avoid overcomplicating the ESI by focusing too much on the specifics of resource definitions. In most cases, a patient will need either no resources, one resource, or two or more resources.

Although resource use can differ depending on the location, provider, or even the individual patient, triage nurses are encouraged to base their ESI resource predictions on the typical management of the most frequent presenting issues. Ideally, any patient arriving at an emergency department should require roughly the same resources. For instance, if a provider evaluates an 82-year-old nursing home resident with an indwelling urinary catheter who presents with fever and cough, it is likely that blood and urine tests, as well as a chest x-ray, will be ordered. The triage nurse can reasonably anticipate that this patient will need two or more resources and should therefore assign an ESI level 3.

While there may be slight differences in procedures among various emergency departments, these usually do not significantly impact the triage rating. For instance, some departments perform pregnancy tests within the ED (which is not considered a resource by ESI), while others send the tests to the lab (which is considered a resource by ESI). However, it is uncommon for patients to require only a pregnancy test, as most will need at least one additional resource. One variation in ED practices that could lead to different ESI levels is how patients with a sole complaint of sore throat are managed. In some hospitals, it is standard to take throat cultures (counted as one resource, ESI level 4), whereas in others, this is not routinely done (no resources, ESI level 5). Another example of practice variation is the application of the Ottawa Ankle Rules, which are evidence-based guidelines to decide if an ankle x-ray is necessary for patients with ankle injuries. The extent to which these rules are used differs between institutions; those that implement the rules at triage may order fewer x-rays compared to those that do not use them regularly.

Temperature is a key factor in evaluating the allocation of resources for infants and young children. This topic will be discussed in Chapter 6.

Clinically, patients classified as ESI level 4 and 5 can wait several hours before being seen by a provider. However, from a customer service perspective, these patients may be more appropriately managed in a fast-track or urgent care environment. Mid-level practitioners with the right skill set and supervision are capable of treating level-4 and 5 patients. The ESI system also offers an operational benefit, as level-5 patients can occasionally be “worked in” for a brief evaluation and disposition by a provider, even when the department is full. Frequently, triage policies specify that ESI level-4 or 5 patients may be directed to an urgent care or fast-track area.

In conclusion, the ESI introduces a novel method for emergency department triage by incorporating predictions regarding the number of resources required to determine patient disposition. For patients classified as ESI levels 3, 4, and 5, resource needs are factored into the triage level assignment, whereas decisions for ESI levels 1 and 2 rely solely on the severity of the patient’s condition. Table 5-2 provides examples of patients in ESI levels 3, 4, and 5. In practice, estimating resource needs has proven highly useful for managing the large volume of patients presenting with non-acute conditions.

### Chapter 6.The Role of Vital Signs in ESI Triage

##### Introduction Figure 6-1. Danger Zone Vital Signs

This chapter centers on decision point D, which involves evaluating the patient's vital signs. By this stage in the ESI algorithm, the triage nurse has already established that the patient does not qualify for ESI level 1 or 2 and will need two or more resources. Because the patient requires at least two resources, they are classified as at least ESI level 3. At this juncture, the nurse reviews the patient’s vital signs, including heart rate, respiratory rate, and oxygen saturation, and, for children under three, temperature as well. If any of the vital signs fall within the danger zone parameters (as shown in decision point D, Figure 6-1), the nurse should seriously consider upgrading the patient’s triage level from 3 to 2.

In the ESI triage training program, significant time should be allocated to discussing how vital signs impact the decision to reclassify a patient from ESI level 3 to level 2. It is important to emphasize that the experienced triage nurse is ultimately responsible for determining if a patient qualifies for ESI level 2, taking into account the patient’s medical history, current medications, and both subjective and objective assessments, including overall appearance. This determination relies on the nurse’s clinical expertise and understanding of normal vital sign ranges for all age groups, as well as the effects of factors like medications, medical history, and pain levels.

##### What Are Vital Signs?

Vital signs are typically basic measurements of physiological functions such as temperature, blood pressure, pulse, respiratory rate, and pulse oximetry (refer to Table 6-1). These measurements often guide healthcare professionals in making clinical decisions. In recent years, nursing literature has increasingly highlighted the significance of pain, with the American Pain Society introducing the term “Pain: the fifth vital sign” to raise awareness about the need for proper pain assessment and management. Evaluating pain is a key part of the ESI and is actually considered earlier in its process. Specifically for ESI, heart rate, respiratory rate, oxygen saturation, and temperature in children under three years old are the vital sign parameters used at decision point D. Vital signs provide objective information that helps determine a patient’s general health status and viability. The results influence how we assess a patient’s overall condition and guide our choices in diagnosis and treatment. Nevertheless, vital signs alone do not fully capture a patient’s health status. They can be influenced by various factors, including prescription drugs, herbal supplements, and recreational substances. For instance, beta-blockers can cause a slow heart rate and mask the expected increase in heart rate during shock. Elderly patients with hypothyroidism may have low body temperatures, even when septic. Similarly, a young adult’s high temperature could be due to recreational drug use.

Vital signs are fluctuating, dynamic markers that supplement a patient’s assessment. Their measurement can depend on the person taking them, and what is considered normal varies depending on the source referenced. Even in optimal circumstances, vital signs may not always be dependable or precise (Edmonds, Mower, Lovato & Lomeli, 2002). Often, the patient’s overall appearance and clinical context are most informative. Nevertheless, if a triage nurse believes that knowing a patient’s vital signs would assist in evaluating risk, then these measurements should be taken. For instance, if a patient is on immunosuppressive drugs, undergoing chemotherapy, or has an illness like AIDS that suppresses the immune system, it is important to check their body temperature.

##### Are Vital Signs Necessary at Triage?

Before the introduction of five-level triage in the United States, it was customary for every patient arriving at an emergency department to have their vital signs measured prior to being assigned a triage level. Vital signs were viewed as a crucial part of the initial nursing evaluation and frequently served as a basis for decision-making. In the traditional three-level triage system, vital signs played a key role in determining how long a patient could safely wait for care; if vital signs were normal, the patient was often allowed to wait longer. As a result, vital signs historically carried significant weight in triage assessments, sometimes more so than the patient’s clinical presentation.

In recent years, updated triage models have recommended the selective use of vital signs during triage (Gilboy, Travers & Wuerz, 2000). Collecting initial vital signs is not a required part of other five-level triage systems and is generally not performed during the triage of level-1 or level-2 patients, who are the most critically ill. For instance, the Guidelines for Implementation of the Australasian Triage Scale in Emergency Departments specify that “vital signs should only be measured at triage if required to estimate urgency, or if time permits” (Australasian College for Emergency Medicine, 2000). Likewise, the Canadian Triage and Acuity Scale (CTAS) states that vital signs are only needed if they are essential for determining the triage level, particularly for levels 3, 4, and 5, and only if time allows (Beveridge et al., 2002). The Manchester Triage Group incorporates specific vital sign criteria as decision points within its flow chart, using these parameters as one of several factors to help the triage nurse determine the patient’s acuity level.

Vital signs are not always the best method for determining triage acuity. Some research indicates that taking vital signs may not be essential during the initial triage assessment. In 2002, Cooper, Flaherty, Lin, and Hubbell investigated how vital signs influence triage status, also taking into account factors like age and communication skills. Their study involved over 14,000 patients across 24 U.S. emergency departments. The findings revealed that vital signs altered the triage acuity level in only 8% of cases. When looking more closely at specific age groups, children aged 2 or younger experienced the greatest change in triage decisions, with an 11.4% shift after vital signs were obtained.

##### Vital Signs and ESI Triage

With ESI triage, the only mandatory situation for checking vital signs is for patients who do not initially qualify as ESI level 1 or 2, but are expected to require two or more resources. For patients assigned to ESI levels 1, 2, 4, or 5, taking vital signs at triage is optional and left to the triage nurse’s judgment. Although the ESI system does not mandate vital sign assessment for every patient at triage, individual institutions may have their own protocols. Hospital policies regarding vital sign assessment at triage are influenced by factors like staffing, patient mix, and available resources, which are not addressed in this handbook. Generally, it is always acceptable to take vital signs when triaging a stable patient. According to ESI, only level-3 patients require vital sign assessment. (Refer to Table 6-2)

The creators of the ESI and the current research team agree that experienced emergency department nurses can use vital sign information to supplement their clinical judgment when assigning ESI ratings to patients. However, there is limited evidence linking abnormal vital signs to emergency department acuity or confirming that these abnormalities reliably indicate serious illness. The ESI has been updated over time to incorporate new evidence and recommendations from the literature. Initially, the ESI working group relied on systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS) research (Rangel-Frausto et al., 1995) to develop the danger zone vital sign criteria and related footnotes. The first ESI version used SIRS criteria, specifically a heart rate over 90 in adults, as a definitive reason to upgrade a patient from ESI level 3 to level 2 (Wuerz, Milne, Eitel, Traers & Gilboy, 2000). Since the SIRS studies focused on mortality predictors in intensive care unit patients, applying these criteria in the ED led to too many false positives at the initial ESI hospitals. As a result, the heart rate threshold was increased to 100 in ESI version 2, and nurses were advised to consider upgrading adult patients with heart rates above 100 to ESI level 2 (Wuerz et al., 2001; Gilboy, Tanabe, Travers, Eitel & Wuerz, 2003). Pediatric vital sign parameters were also added to the danger zone vital signs criteria.

When applying the ESI triage system, it is not required to assess vital signs in the triage area for patients who are immediately assigned to level 1 or 2. If a patient appears unstable or has a primary complaint that requires urgent intervention, they should be quickly moved to the treatment area. In these cases, the resuscitation team will take and monitor vital signs at the bedside. This includes patients whose clinical presentation suggests a high risk or an immediate need for cardiovascular or respiratory support, such as those who look pale, sweaty, or cyanotic. Nevertheless, the triage nurse may choose to check vital signs in the triage area if there is no available bed or if they believe the information will help determine the correct triage level. Some patients may only be recognized as ESI level 1 after their vital signs are measured. For instance, an elderly patient who is awake and alert but complains of dizziness may be found to have a critical condition if their heart rate is discovered to be 32 or 180 during the vital sign check.

As outlined in the ESI algorithm in Chapter 3, when patients do not qualify for ESI level-1 or 2, the triage nurse proceeds to decision point C. At this stage, the nurse evaluates how many resources the patient is likely to require in the emergency department. If only one or no resources are anticipated, the patient can be categorized as ESI level 4 or 5, and a vital sign check is not needed. However, if two or more resources are expected, the nurse moves to decision point D, where vital signs should be measured. Vital signs are particularly significant for some patients during triage, especially those assigned to ESI level 3, as they can provide additional evidence of possible severe illness. If any vital signs fall within the danger zone, it is advised that the triage nurse consider upgrading the patient from level 3 to level 2.

The ESI triage system specifically includes heart rate, respiratory rate, and oxygen saturation (for patients who may have respiratory issues) as vital signs. Temperature is only considered for children younger than three years old. It is important to recognize that abnormal blood pressure is not part of the ESI triage criteria. However, this does not mean that triage nurses should avoid measuring blood pressure or temperature in older children or adults; rather, these measurements are not typically used to determine the correct triage acuity level.

##### Vital Signs and Pediatric Fever

In this edition of the ESI Handbook, version 4 (v.4) of the ESI algorithm has been revised to reflect updated pediatric fever guidelines. As illustrated in Figure 6-2, note D of the ESI algorithm specifically covers pediatric fever in the context of ESI triage. This part includes guidance from the American College of Emergency Physicians’ Clinical Policy for Children Under Three Years Old Presenting to the Emergency Department With Fever (ACEP, 2003).

The ESI Triage Research Team advises that vital signs should be checked in patients younger than 3 years old during triage. Specifically, taking a temperature is crucial for all children from birth up to 36 months, and assessing vital signs is a key part of evaluating any infant under 36 months with a known fever (Baraff, 2000). This process helps distinguish between ESI level-2 and level-3 patients and reduces the chance that children who may have bacteremia are directed to fast-track care or face inappropriate delays. Keep in mind that any patient who is in immediate danger or at high risk will be categorized as ESI level 1 or 2.

Table 6-3 offers guidance to triage nurses on using the ESI to evaluate febrile children and select the most suitable triage level. Fever is commonly defined as a rectal temperature above 38.0° C (100.4° F) (Baraff et al., 1993; ACEP, 2003). Infants younger than 28 days with a fever should be regarded as high risk and given at least an ESI level 2. For infants aged 28 days to 3 months, there are no definitive guidelines. The ESI research team advises triage nurses to follow their hospital’s local protocols. It is recommended that nurses consider assigning at least an ESI level 2 to these patients.

In version 4 of the ESI, we have adopted a different set of guidelines for managing fever in children aged 3 to 36 months. These guidelines focus on children with high fevers, defined as temperatures above 39.0° C (102.2° F) (ACEP, 2003). When evaluating a highly febrile child in this age group, the triage nurse should determine the child’s immunization status and whether there is a clear source for the fever. If the child is not fully immunized or if no source for the fever can be identified, the child should be categorized as at least ESI level 3. However, if the child’s immunizations are current and there is an obvious cause for the fever, an ESI level of 4 or 5 is suitable. For instance, a 7-month-old who is under pediatric care, has received the Haemophilus influenza type b (HIB) vaccine, and presents with a fever while tugging at his ear could be classified as ESI level 5.

##### Case Examples

The case studies below illustrate how vital signs information is utilized during ESI triage.

A healthy-appearing 28-year-old woman states, “My doctor said I’m around 6 weeks pregnant, and now I believe I might be having a miscarriage.” She reports that she began spotting earlier today and is now experiencing cramping. She has no allergies or past medical history and is taking prenatal vitamins. Her vital signs are: temperature 98°F, heart rate 112, respiratory rate 22, and blood pressure 90/60.

This patient qualifies for an upgrade from level 3 to level 2 triage due to her vital signs. Her elevated heart rate and respiratory rate, along with low blood pressure, are worrisome. These symptoms may suggest internal hemorrhage caused by a ruptured ectopic pregnancy.

The mother of a 15-month-old reports that her baby has been experiencing diarrhea since the previous day. She mentions that everyone in the family has recently had the gastrointestinal virus that is circulating. The baby has shown reduced appetite, a mild fever, and several episodes of watery stools. The child is calmly sitting on the mother’s lap. The triage nurse observes indications of dehydration. There is no past medical history, no known drug allergies, and the baby is not on any medications. Vital signs are: temperature 100.4°F, heart rate 142, respiratory rate 48, and blood pressure 76/50.

This patient qualifies for at least ESI level 3. He will need laboratory tests and intravenous fluids as resources. Given his vital signs, the triage nurse may escalate him to ESI level 2. For an infant of this age, both heart rate and respiratory rate fall outside the normal range.

A 57-year-old woman states, “I need to see a doctor about my cough. I just can’t get rid of it. I barely slept last night because I was coughing so much, and now I’m extremely tired.” She mentions having a fever of 101° last night and is producing yellow sputum when she coughs. Her medical history includes a hysterectomy three years ago; she is not on any medications but is allergic to penicillin. Her vital signs are: temperature 101.4°, respiratory rate 28, heart rate 100, and oxygen saturation 90 percent.

At the start of her triage evaluation, this patient appears to possibly have pneumonia. She is likely to require two or more resources, but her low oxygen levels and rapid breathing are worrisome. Based on her vital signs, the triage nurse should upgrade her to an ESI level 2.

A 34-year-old obese woman arrives at triage with complaints of diffuse abdominal pain rated 6 out of 10, ongoing for the past two days. She reports multiple episodes of vomiting and notes that her last bowel movement was three days ago. Her medical history includes back surgery; she is not on any medications and has a peanut allergy. Her vital signs are: temperature 97.8°F, heart rate 104, respiratory rate 16, blood pressure 132/80, and oxygen saturation 99%.

This patient will require at least two resources, such as laboratory tests, intravenous fluids, possibly IV medication for nausea, and a CT scan. The triage nurse should assess the patient’s vital signs, paying particular attention to the heart rate. Although the heart rate is slightly outside the normal range for the patient’s age, this may be attributed to pain or physical activity. Therefore, the appropriate action is to categorize the patient as ESI level 3.

A crying 9-year-old arrives at triage with her mother after slipping on an icy sidewalk and hurting her right forearm. The forearm appears clearly deformed, but circulation, sensation, and movement are intact. According to her mother, the child has no allergies, is not on any medications, and is otherwise healthy. Her vital signs are: blood pressure 100/68, heart rate 124, respiratory rate 32, and oxygen saturation 99 percent.

The child is in pain from her fall and is clearly distressed. She will need at least two resources: an x-ray and an orthopedic consultation, and possibly conscious sedation. Although her heart rate and breathing are increased, the triage nurse can confidently assign her to ESI level 3. The changes in her vital signs are most likely caused by pain and emotional upset.

A 72-year-old woman arrives at the emergency department using nasal cannula oxygen for her advanced COPD. She tells the triage nurse that she has an infected cat bite on her left hand, which appears red, swollen, and tender. She has no other health issues, uses albuterol as needed, and takes a daily aspirin. She has no known drug allergies. Her vital signs are: temperature 99.6°F, heart rate 88, respiratory rate 22, blood pressure 138/80, and oxygen saturation 91%. She reports no difficulty breathing.

This patient needs at least two resources: laboratory tests and intravenous antibiotics. She qualifies for ESI level 3. Although the triage nurse observes that her oxygen saturation and respiratory rate fall outside the normal adult range, the patient has advanced COPD. Therefore, these vital signs are not worrisome in her case, and she will remain at ESI level 3 without being up-triaged.

##### Case Examples

The case studies below illustrate how vital signs information is utilized during ESI triage.

A healthy-appearing 28-year-old woman states, “My doctor said I’m approximately 6 weeks pregnant, and I believe I might be having a miscarriage.” She explains, “I began spotting this morning and am now experiencing cramps.” She has no allergies or past medical history and is taking prenatal vitamins. Her vital signs are: temperature 98°F, heart rate 112, respiratory rate 22, and blood pressure 90/60.

This patient qualifies for an upgrade from level 3 to level 2 triage due to her vital signs. Her elevated heart rate and respiratory rate, along with low blood pressure, are worrisome. These symptoms may suggest internal hemorrhage caused by a ruptured ectopic pregnancy.

The mother of a 15-month-old reports that her baby has been experiencing diarrhea since the previous day. She mentions that everyone in the family has recently had the gastrointestinal virus that is circulating. The baby has shown reduced appetite, a mild fever, and several episodes of watery stools. The child is calmly sitting on the mother’s lap. The triage nurse observes indications of dehydration. There is no past medical history, no known drug allergies, and the baby is not on any medications. Vital signs are: temperature 100.4°F, heart rate 142, respiratory rate 48, and blood pressure 76/50.

This patient qualifies for at least ESI level 3. He will need laboratory tests and intravenous fluids as resources. Given his vital signs, the triage nurse may escalate him to ESI level 2. In an infant of this age, both heart rate and respiratory rate exceed the normal limits.

A 57-year-old woman states, “I need to see a doctor about my cough. I just can’t get rid of it. I barely slept last night because I was coughing so much, and now I’m extremely tired.” She mentions having a fever of 101° last night and is producing yellow sputum when she coughs. Her medical history includes a hysterectomy three years ago; she is not on any medications but is allergic to penicillin. Her vital signs are: temperature 101.4°, respiratory rate 28, heart rate 100, and oxygen saturation 90 percent.

At the start of her triage evaluation, this patient appears to possibly have pneumonia. She is likely to require two or more resources, but her low oxygen levels and rapid breathing are worrisome. Based on her vital signs, the triage nurse should upgrade her to an ESI level 2.

A 34-year-old obese woman arrives at triage with complaints of diffuse abdominal pain rated 6 out of 10, ongoing for the past two days. She reports multiple episodes of vomiting and notes that her last bowel movement was three days ago. Her medical history includes back surgery; she is not on any medications and has a peanut allergy. Her vital signs are: temperature 97.8°F, heart rate 104, respiratory rate 16, blood pressure 132/80, and oxygen saturation 99%.

This patient will require at least two resources, such as laboratory tests, intravenous fluids, possibly IV medication for nausea, and a CT scan. The triage nurse should assess the patient’s vital signs, paying particular attention to the heart rate. Although the heart rate is slightly outside the normal range for the patient’s age, this may be attributed to pain or physical activity. Therefore, the appropriate action is to categorize the patient as ESI level 3.

A crying 9-year-old arrives at triage with her mother after slipping on an icy sidewalk and hurting her right forearm. The forearm appears clearly deformed, but circulation, sensation, and movement are intact. According to her mother, the child has no allergies, is not on any medications, and is otherwise healthy. Her vital signs are: blood pressure 100/68, heart rate 124, respiratory rate 32, and oxygen saturation 99 percent.

The child is in pain from her fall and is clearly distressed. She will need at least two resources: an x-ray and an orthopedic consultation, and possibly conscious sedation. Although her heart rate and breathing are increased, the triage nurse can confidently assign her to ESI level 3. The changes in her vital signs are most likely caused by pain and emotional upset.

A 72-year-old woman arrives at the emergency department using nasal cannula oxygen for her advanced COPD. She tells the triage nurse that she has an infected cat bite on her left hand, which appears red, swollen, and tender. She has no other health issues, uses albuterol as needed, and takes a daily aspirin. She has no known drug allergies. Her vital signs are: temperature 99.6°F, heart rate 88, respiratory rate 22, blood pressure 138/80, and oxygen saturation 91%. She reports no difficulty breathing.

This patient needs at least two resources: laboratory tests and intravenous antibiotics. She qualifies for ESI level 3. Although the triage nurse observes that her oxygen saturation and respiratory rate fall outside the normal adult range, the patient has advanced COPD. Therefore, these vital signs are not worrisome, and she will remain at ESI level 3 without being up-triaged.

##### Conclusion

This chapter lays the groundwork for comprehending how vital signs are used within the Emergency Severity Index triage system. It also discusses the unique considerations for patients younger than 36 months. More research is needed to determine the most appropriate vital sign thresholds for emergency department triage. Additional studies will focus on pediatric patients arriving at the emergency department. We anticipate that future updates to the ESI will incorporate more evidence about how well triage vital signs predict outcomes for both pediatric and adult patients.

### Appendix A. Frequently Asked Questions

##### Chapter 3.

###### Frequently Asked Questions

1. Is it necessary to raise the triage level for an adult patient if their heart rate exceeds 100?

No, it is something to take into account.

2. Is it necessary to increase a patient’s triage level if their pain score is 7 out of 10 or higher?

No, this is just one aspect to take into account.

If a patient has ongoing confusion, does that mean they should always be assigned to ESI level 2?

No, patients experiencing a sudden change in consciousness are classified as ESI level 2.

4. At what times should vital signs be measured?

For any patient classified as ESI level-3, vital signs are always taken if the triage nurse believes they could be helpful.

##### Chapter 4.

###### Frequently Asked Questions

Am I required to assign an ESI triage level of 2 to a 25-year-old woman who reports her pain as 10 out of 10 but is eating potato chips?

No. Since her vital signs are stable and she doesn’t meet any high-risk criteria, this patient should be categorized as ESI level 3. She will probably require lab tests and at least two resources, such as x-rays, an IV, or pain medication. Therefore, you should not allocate your last available bed to her.

Should an 80-year-old woman with ongoing confusion be assigned an ESI level 2 during triage?

No. The sudden appearance of confusion, lethargy, or disorientation qualifies for ESI level 2.

3. Shouldn’t a patient experiencing active chest pain be assigned an ESI level 1? After all, they ought to receive the highest priority.

Not every patient presenting with chest pain qualifies for ESI level-1. Patients who are unresponsive, without a pulse, not breathing, or in need of urgent life-saving measures fall under level-1. Those with chest pain who appear pale, sweaty, have low blood pressure, or a slow heart rate and need rapid IV access to stabilize their condition are also considered level-1. Patients who are stable but experiencing ongoing chest pain generally meet high-risk criteria and should be assigned ESI level-2, with prompt placement arranged.

##### Chapter 5.

###### Frequently Asked Questions

1. Why isn’t teaching someone how to walk with crutches considered a resource?

Although teaching patients how to use crutches can take up a significant amount of the emergency department staff’s time, this instruction is frequently given to individuals with uncomplicated ankle sprains. These cases are generally categorized as ESI level 4 (ankle x-ray = one resource). Such patients are clearly less acute and require fewer resources compared to more complicated cases, such as those with tibia or fibula fractures, who are typically classified as ESI level 3 (leg x-rays, orthopedic consultation, casting or splinting, IV pain management = two or more resources). Using a nursing resource intensity measure would more accurately represent the ED staff’s efforts in providing crutch-walking instruction.

2. Why doesn’t a splint count as a resource?

Using basic, pre-made splints (like those for ankle sprains) does not count as a resource. However, when ED staff fabricate and apply splints—such as thumb spica splints for thumb fractures—this is considered a resource. To distinguish between patients with extremity injuries: those suspected of having fractures should be assigned ESI level 3 (requiring two or more resources, such as x-rays, pain management, and the creation and application of splints or casts), while those more likely to have uncomplicated sprains should be classified as ESI level 4.

3. Why isn’t a saline or heparin lock considered a resource?

In general, placing a heparin lock does not require much time from the emergency department staff. Nevertheless, most patients who receive heparin locks also need at least two additional resources, such as lab tests or IV medications, which typically results in them being categorized as ESI level 3 regardless.

Are all patients undergoing conscious sedation classified as ESI level 3 or above?

Conscious sedation is regarded as a complex procedure (requiring two resources) and is typically carried out on patients who are also undergoing laboratory tests, x-rays, or additional interventions like fracture reduction or dilation and curettage.

5. Are eye irrigation, administration of nebulized medications, and blood transfusions classified as resources?

All three are regarded as resources when assigning ESI triage ratings. These resources are typically utilized for patients with more acute conditions, demand considerable time from emergency department staff, and are likely to result in extended patient stays.

6. Do all patients with asthma fall under ESI level 4 since they will need nebulized treatment?

No. Asthma patients who are stable and only need nebulized medication are classified as ESI level 4. Some, however, experience severe respiratory distress and qualify for ESI level 2. Others fall in between, needing intravenous steroids or a chest x-ray along with nebulized treatments, and are categorized as ESI level 3. Lastly, those who just need a prescription refill for their inhaler are assigned ESI level 5, as they do not need any additional resources.

##### Chapter 6.

###### Frequently Asked Questions

Why is it unnecessary to use vital signs when triaging patients classified as ESI level 1 or 2?

Vital signs are not required to classify patients as life-threatening (ESI level 1) or high-risk (ESI level 2). Because patients at ESI levels 1 and 2 are in critical condition, the medical team must act promptly. Multiple interventions can take place at the same time, and vital signs may be obtained during the initial evaluation in the main acute section of the emergency department.

2. Why are vital signs not mandatory for patients classified as ESI level-4 and 5?

Vital signs are not required to classify patients as low or no resource (ESI level 4 or 5). Additionally, the pain, anxiety, and discomfort experienced during an emergency department visit can often affect a patient’s vital signs, which may normalize soon after the initial evaluation. Nevertheless, a nurse may decide to check vital signs if there are indications of abnormal symptoms, such as changes in skin color, mental status, dizziness, or sweating. If there are no physical signs suggesting the need for vital sign assessment, the patient may be directed to the main emergency department or an express care room.

3. What is the reason for taking vital signs on patients classified as ESI level-3?

Vital signs help distinguish between patients who require multiple resources and are stable (ESI level 3) and those who may be unstable or at higher risk (ESI level 2). Sometimes, patients classified as ESI level 3 may actually have unstable vital signs despite appearing stable. For ESI level-3 patients, checking vital signs acts as an important safety measure. Typically, ESI level-3 patients have more complex conditions and many end up being admitted to the hospital. Because they are not suitable for the fast-track area, these patients may need to wait longer for definitive care. They pose a particular challenge during triage, making it essential for caregivers to use vital signs to ensure the correct ESI level is assigned.

4. Why are temperatures always taken for pediatric patients under 36 months of age?

Temperature helps distinguish pediatric patients who require few or no resources (ESI level 4 or 5) from those likely to need multiple resources. In infants under three months old, an abnormal temperature can suggest bacteremia and categorize the child as high-risk.

5. Why does the literature offer differing perspectives on the importance of vital signs in the triage process?

There is no conclusive evidence regarding the usefulness of vital signs in emergency department triage. Numerous elements can impact the reliability of vital sign measurements, which are somewhat dependent on the person performing the assessment. In certain situations, factors like long-term medication use (such as beta-blockers) can influence vital signs. Additionally, vital signs can serve to meet some public health responsibilities that emergency departments have. Finally, they are also used to classify young pediatric patients into different groups.

6. Does JCAHO mandate that vital signs be taken during triage?

The Joint Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations does not explicitly set a standard for vital signs. However, it does state that physiological parameters should be evaluated based on the patient's condition.

7. Should the vital sign thresholds in the danger zone box be strictly enforced?

In everyday practice, surpassing the danger zone vital sign thresholds leads to up-triage being “considered” instead of being done automatically. The skilled triage nurse must rely on sound clinical judgment to assign the patient’s ESI level. This decision involves evaluating the patient’s vital signs, medical history, medications, and overall clinical presentation. Further research is necessary to establish how well vital signs predict outcomes during triage and to define exact thresholds for up-triage.

8. What should be done if patients classified as ESI level-4 or 5 exhibit danger zone vital signs?

Although taking vital signs is not necessary to assign ESI levels 4 or 5, many patients may still have their vitals checked during triage if that is part of the emergency department’s standard procedures. According to the ESI triage algorithm, the triage nurse does not need to consider vital signs when determining if a patient qualifies for ESI level 5 (no resources) or ESI level 4 (one resource). Nevertheless, in real-world settings, a careful nurse will apply sound clinical judgment and may factor in vital sign data when assigning the ESI level. For example, if a patient only wants a prescription refill, has no acute symptoms, and presents with a heart rate of 104 after walking to the ED, the nurse may still assign an ESI level 5. Conversely, if the same patient has a heart rate of 148 and it is irregular, the nurse should assign an ESI level 2. The triage nurse must also address situations such as elevated blood pressure in a patient otherwise classified as ESI level 4 or 5. If the patient has no symptoms related to the high blood pressure, the triage level should remain unchanged. Typically, elevated blood pressure in an asymptomatic patient will not be managed in the ED, but it is important to refer the patient to a primary care provider for further evaluation and long-term management.